<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Acknowledgments, Unstoppable Us, Volume 1: How Humans Took Over the World</title>
		<link href="../css/prh_resets.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/rh_static.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9781774882221_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:cc1ec3a7-5047-477e-9787-921292761d53" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding sans" id="ack">
			<h1 class="bm_head orange_bm"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_182" role="doc-pagebreak" title="182"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_183" role="doc-pagebreak" title="183"/><b>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</b></h1>
			<p>It takes a community to raise a child. It also takes a community to create a book.</p>
			<p class="indent">When you look at a book’s cover, you usually see only the author’s name in big letters. So you might imagine that just one person wrote the book. Maybe the author sat in their room for a year, wrote everything down—and there you are! A new book is out!</p>
			<p class="indent">In reality, it is very different. So many people in so many places have worked hard on the book, doing lots of things the author couldn’t do, or doesn’t even know how to do. Without their contributions, there would be no book.</p>
			<p class="indent">To type a sentence usually takes just a few seconds. But it actually took many weeks to write some of the sentences in this book. People had to check that we got the facts right. One month they were busy reading scientific papers about Neanderthals, and the next month it was all about whales.</p>
			<p class="indent">Other people thought hard about the exact message of the sentence: Is it really what we want readers to know about history? Could it be misinterpreted? Might it hurt <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_184" role="doc-pagebreak" title="184"/>somebody? And then more people worked on the style. Is the sentence clear? Could it be made clearer?</p>
			<p class="indent">And it was the same with the illustrations. Some illustrations were done ten times, going back and forth, sketching something and throwing it in the bin, drawing something and then redrawing it again and again. It should be a boy. No, make it a girl. Perhaps a bit younger? No, that’s too young….</p>
			<p class="indent">So writing a single sentence or drawing a single illustration could involve lots of emails and phone calls and meetings. And somebody had to coordinate all those emails and phone calls and meetings. And then there were contracts to sign and salaries to pay, and don’t forget the food—nobody can do anything unless they eat, right?</p>
			<p class="indent">So I would like to thank all the people who helped create this book. I could never have done it without them.</p>
			<p class="indent">Ricard Zaplana Ruiz drew the wonderful illustrations that bring human history to life.</p>
			<p class="indent">Jonathan Beck enthusiastically supported the project and helped bring it to fruition.</p>
			<p class="indent">Susanne Stark taught me how to see the world from the perspective of young people, and how to write more simply, more clearly, and more deeply than I thought I could.</p>
			<p class="indent">Sebastian Ullrich meticulously read and reread every word and made sure that in our attempt to write an engaging and accessible story, we did not compromise on scientific accuracy.</p>
			<p class="indent">Then there are the wonderful people of the Sapienship team: Naama Wartenburg, Jason Parry, Daniel Taylor, Michael Zur, Nina Zivy, Shay Abel, Guangyu Chen, Hannah Morgan, Galiete Gothelf, Nadav Neuman, Hannah Yahav, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_185" role="doc-pagebreak" title="185"/>and Ettie Sabag, with the additional support from the very talented copy editor, Adriana Hunter; the layout designer, Hanna Shapiro; and the diversity consultant, Slava Greenberg. All led by our dedicated and brilliant CEO, Naama Avital. Each and every team member contributed to this project. Without their professionalism, diligence, and creativity, there would have been no book.</p>
			<p class="indent">I would also like to thank my mother, Pnina; my sisters, Einat and Liat; and my nieces and nephews, Tomer, Noga, Matan, Romi, and Uri, for their love and support.</p>
			<p class="indent">My grandmother Fanny passed away at the age of 100 just as we were finishing the book. I will always be grateful for her unlimited kindness and joy.</p>
			<p class="indent">And I would finally like to thank my husband, Itzik, who has dreamt about creating this book for years. He founded Sapienship to make this and other projects come to life and has been my inspiration and my loving companion for over two decades.</p>
			<p class="aut1"><span class="orange_bm"><b>—Yuval Noah Harari</b></span></p>
			<p class="sp15">Thanks to all the fellow Homo sapiens of my profession for sharing their knowledge and friendship.</p>
			<p class="indent">To Ada Soler and Rosa Samper for the vote of confidence.</p>
			<p class="indent">To the team of professionals that make up Sapienship for their help and guidance in all the steps of the creation process.</p>
			<p class="indent">And of course to Yuval Noah Harari for trusting my illustrations to travel halfway around the world with his text.</p>
			<p class="aut1"><span class="orange_bm"><b>—Ricard Zaplana Ruiz</b></span></p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>