<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h8"/>Chapter 1</h2>
<h2 class="ct2">OPENING THE VAULTS OF TIME—ARCHAEOLOGY AND PARAPSYCHOLOGY</h2>
<p class="h3"><a id="h9"/><b><i>There are More Things in Heaven and Earth…</i></b></p>
<p class="noindent">On-screen archaeologist and Intelligence agent Sophia Hapgood, who for a period was the girlfriend of Indiana Jones, was probably not the most warmhearted person around, as Jones on one occasion complained to his mentor, Dr Marcus Brody: ‘You know, Marcus, the coldest year of my life was the one I spent in Iceland with Sophia.’ However, Hapgood possessed other qualities that within both Intelligence and archaeology could presumably be at least as important: she was strong-willed and she was psychic. But, archaeology based on clairvoyance—does such a thing ever occur apart from in the movies? Well, it must be admitted this can hardly be said to be the preferred method in archaeology. But something extraordinary took place in 2012 that might make at least <i>some</i> archaeologists consider broadening their methodological scope an inch or two. After being lost since 1485, the remains of King Richard III—‘A horse! A horse! My kingdom for a horse!’—were sensationally discovered after the Scottish screenwriter and amateur historian Philippa Langley did a nice little piece of clairvoyant archaeology, so it seems!</p>
<p class="indent">Langley had long been an enthusiast and defender of Richard III, the last Plantagenet king, believing his reputation had been willfully and unfairly tainted by Tudor propaganda. Archaeologists had given her a fairly good idea of the possible location; that of the former Greyfriars Church in Leicester, in which Richard’s body could have been placed some time after his death. The church was demolished by Henry VIII and today the remains lie sealed under asphalt and buildings. But no one knew anything for certain, not about the abbey and definitely not about King Richard. One common opinion held was that his remains had been thrown in the River Soar. Langley has been interviewed many times about the case, and has given the following account of the historical site:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I walked around that car park and I just knew there was nothing there. It was ‘dead.’ As I walked away, I saw another, private car park over to the right. I know how mad this sounds, but I snuck under the barrier and, on a very particular spot, I had the strongest sensation that I was walking on Richard’s grave</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>It was a hot summer and I had goose bumps so badly and I was freezing cold. I walked past a particular spot and absolutely knew I was walking on his grave. I am a rational human being but the feeling I got was the same feeling I have had before when a truth is given to me</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">On the basis of this clairvoyantly conceived idea, Langley organized an excavation, and—lo and behold!—about three feet (one meter) under the ground at the spot she had pointed out, a skeleton was found. It was DNA tested against the living descendants of Richard III’s sister, Anne of York, and found to be a 99.999 percent match!</p>
<p class="indent">Regrettably we are not able to close the story in the full fairytale fashion, by announcing that Philippa, after having found her much sought-after king, married him and lived happily ever after. But even if we cannot herald love and a wedding and showers of white roses, there was a happy ending for Philippa—she was awarded an MBE by the Queen for ‘services to the exhumation and identification of Richard III.’ And as regards King Richard, he was reburied on March 26, 2015 with due pomp and circumstance in Leicester Cathedral following a week of commemorative events.</p>
<p class="indent">So, then, did the discovery of Richard III come about by an amateur archaeologist having more than her fair share of ‘beginner’s luck’—a one-in-a-million fortuitous shot, based on pure accident? Even if the chances are small, it <i>is</i> possible to win the Lottery. That question will of course be for each of us to ponder. But Langley herself, as we heard, clearly thinks of the incident as something other than sheer luck; she felt that her hunch, accompanied by strong bodily sensations, provided her with real information: ‘The feeling I got was the same feeling I have had before when a truth is given to me.’ (Speaking of truth, the old word ‘soothsayer,’ now used to mean a person who predicts the future, literally means ‘truthsayer.’ Perhaps hard to believe, but still…). Even if we shall never know whether Langley’s intriguing combination of synchronized feeling and finding was based on clairvoyance or just on sheer luck, what is certain is that her case is not unique. There are, in fact, several instances where (professional) archaeologists have claimed to make significant discoveries based on information obtained via clairvoyance. Let’s have a look at some classic cases.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h10"/>Mysticism in Mexico</p>
<p class="noindent">Clarence Weiant (1897–1986) is recognized as one of the people instrumental in rewriting the history of ancient Mexico. This came about in the following manner: Weiant, a multifaceted man who had begun his career as a chiropractor but later opted for anthropology, was working on his doctoral thesis when, just before World War II, he was invited to participate in what was to become an epochal excavation at the ancient cultural field of Tres Zapotes, Veracruz in eastern Mexico. The excavation was conducted under the auspices of the distinguished National Geographic Society and the Smithsonian Institution.</p>
<p class="indent">The environment was challenging: there were snakes, tarantulas and a variety of other nasties such as we’ve all seen in movies, and in some places the crew were forced to wind their way through waist-deep mud. It was arduous work, the anticipated findings did not materialize and frustration built up. In a most interesting lecture presented to the American Anthropological Association in December 1959 (<a href="http://bit.ly/125gC8A">http://bit.ly/125gC8A</a>), Weiant recounts what then happened:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>After we had spent some days in fruitless digging in the immediate vicinity of the Cabeza Colosal—a giant stone head, six feet high [2m], 18 feet [5.5m] in diameter and weighing 10 tons [9,000kg]—and had used a plough to tear up the small plaza situated between the giant head and the nearest mound, I was approached by Emilio Tegoma, one of our workmen, reputed to be the oldest man in Tres Zapotes. He assured me that he possessed the power to see things at a distance and things hidden. If we would listen to him, he would lead us to a place where we would find what we were looking for. He led us to what is referred to in our reports as the zone of the burials. Within twenty minutes after ground was broken here, the first beautiful and unbroken figurine of a Maya priest came out of the ground</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">This became the first of a series of highly significant finds, including 15 statues and a number of stone tablets with descriptions containing time references as far back as the year 31 <small>BCE</small>—the oldest references yet found on the American continent. Frustration was turned into success, and Weiant was given the rare honor of having his dissertation published as a special Smithsonian bulletin. Together with follow-up excavations conducted by others, Weiant’s findings led to radical changes by scientists in their understanding of the history of the area. Hereafter it was no longer assumed that the Mayans or the Aztecs constituted the original culture of Mesoamerica—the broad cultural field covering ‘the middle’ of the two Americas—but rather that it was the obscure Olmecs (c. 1500 <small>BCE</small>–400 <small>BCE</small>) that had formed the ‘mother civilization’ of the area. In other words, the whole Mesoamerican cultural history was revised!</p>
<p class="indent">Not an insignificant result from the clairvoyant visions of an elderly Indigenous worker…if clairvoyance really was involved? Maybe Emilio Tegoma just had a lucky day at work? Or maybe he simply conveyed knowledge that was common among locals? Of this we cannot be certain. But Weiant, for his part, was inclined to see the information provided by Tegoma as stemming from clairvoyance rather than from plain luck or from the ‘social stock of knowledge.’ This was due to several experiences of the kind, including the following:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Later, on a Sunday afternoon, when it had occurred to me that this might be a good man to consult for information on the history and ethnology of Tres Zapotes, although I did not know how or where I might find him on an off day, he suddenly appeared at the camp, told me that he knew I wished to ask him some questions, and he gave evidence that he knew in advance what the questions would be</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Weiant lists a string of cases, involving different researchers, where paranormal abilities, according to his perspective, could have been involved. He remarks that even if separate episodes cannot be considered scientific evidence, he nevertheless—based on his own experience and that of others—would recommend that ‘every anthropologist (in the US archaeology is usually regarded as a subdivision of anthropology), whether believer or unbeliever, should acquaint himself with the techniques of parapsychological research and make use of these, as well as any other means at his disposal […].’ And Weiant concludes his lecture on a visionary note: ‘Only a few times in the history of civilization, it seems to me, has an intellectual challenge of this magnitude presented itself. How can a science which purports to be the Science of Man ignore it?’</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h11"/>A Modern Merlin in the Kingdom of Arthur</p>
<p class="noindent">Some years earlier a gifted English architect and archaeologist had reached a similar conclusion, namely Frederick Bligh Bond (1864–1945. And since we are now in parenthesis, let me parenthetically add that Bond’s grandfather was the nephew of Captain William Bligh of <i>Mutiny on the Bounty</i> fame.). Bond frequented societies involved with the occult in one way or another—the Freemasons, the Theosophical Society, the Society for Psychical Research, the Rosicrucian Society of England and the Ghost Club—and in due course he also worked as an editor for a couple of journals of occult lore. ‘Occult’ may perhaps sound somewhat sinister in the ears of some modern readers, but its original meaning is not connected to black magic or any other evil; the word is derived from the Latin <i>occultus</i>, meaning ‘secret’ or ‘hidden’, and is a neutral term for phenomena that are obscure to us. For example, Isaac Newton, who first formulated the law of gravitation, describes gravity as having ‘occult’ qualities, as it cannot be seen and it exerts its power at a distance and in a secret way.</p>
<p class="indent">Bond first had a successful practice as an architect in Bristol, designing official buildings including public halls, hospitals, university buildings and schools. Later he became recognized as an expert on the restoration of medieval churches, but today he is primarily remembered for his pioneering archaeological work in Glastonbury Abbey in southwest England. The first abbey was founded in the 700s, and Glastonbury was, for a period, the largest and richest abbey in the land. After the last abbot, Richard Whiting, was executed in 1539, a casualty of Henry VIII’s proclivity for violence, the abbey was dissolved and started to deteriorate, and during the following centuries it fell into complete ruin. Furthermore, the abbey’s proud history almost disappeared into oblivion.</p>
<p class="indent">The area is mythical to its core: Some believe that Cadbury Castle, a fortress from the fifth century on a nearby hill, might perhaps be the legendary Camelot—the castle of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table. Nobody knows if there was indeed a historical King Arthur, but in anno Domini 1191, the monks of Glastonbury reportedly found an oak coffin, containing the skeletal remains of a human couple and a lead crucifix with an inscription that spawned protracted speculation as to whether the tomb could have belonged to King Arthur and his Queen Guinevere. If this were the case, then Glastonbury, which in the early Middle Ages was surrounded by wetland areas, might have been the mystical <i>Avalon</i>—the island to which Arthur, according to legend, was brought after being mortally wounded. However, the common (and sadly more prosaic) perception is that the tomb was fabricated in order to entice more pilgrims to finance the rebuilding in 1184 following a fire. Be it Avalon or not, Glastonbury Abbey is for many reasons—Celtic, Christian, political-historical, literary, and occult—an important monument, and is visited annually by more than 100,000 people.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h12"/>What Goes Around Comes Around</p>
<p class="noindent">With such a mystical haze hanging over the area it was perhaps only to be expected that ‘the invisible hand of destiny’ would entrust the assignment to excavate the ruins to a person with a deep commitment to the occult, perhaps even a little <i>too</i> deep. For in 1921—in spite of his success with the excavations that he had been working on since 1908—Frederick Bligh Bond was fired by his employer, the Church of England, since it had become clear that he had applied spiritualistic methods to accomplish his discoveries! As early as 1907 Bond and his intuitive assistant, the former navy captain John Allan Bartlett, had received communications from spirits—or ‘spirits’ if you’d rather—via so-called <i>automatic writing</i>. This is a technique used by spiritualists—and also by some psychologists and artists—that involves allowing the hand to write without conscious control, so as to leave the spirits (or eventually the subconscious mind) in command. Bond would ask his questions of the spirits, and Bartlett would then let his hand be ‘taken over’ to become a tool for writing—and sometimes also drawing—their answers: ‘Stand ye and be as waxe in our hands,’ the spirits urged them (a little creepy, I would say!).</p>
<p class="indent">The messages claimed to originate from a group of persons/spirits who called themselves ‘The Watchers’—important among them being the penultimate abbot of Glastonbury, Richard Beere (deceased 1524), and an otherwise unknown monk, Brother Johannes Bryant. Messages were partly delivered in Latin (of varying quality), partly in medieval English and partly in relatively modern English. In general, the spirits seemed to respond based on their personal interests and perspectives—don’t we all, really—be that of an abbot, a mason or a monk.</p>
<p class="indent">Abbot Beere was a highly cultivated man. We know he corresponded with Erasmus of Rotterdam, the learned humanist, and he commissioned a number of exquisite buildings in Glastonbury. In 1503, Henry VII sent Beere as an ambassador to Rome to congratulate the new pope, Pius III, on his election. After returning from Italy, Beere took the initiative to build what was likely a spectacular chapel, in the new, ornamental Italian style, and dedicated to Our Lady of Loretto. (Legend has it that the house in which the Virgin Mary lived was carried by angels to the Italian town of Loreto, which has been a pilgrimage destination for centuries.) This chapel eventually became an increasingly significant theme in the later conversations between Bond and the spirits.</p>
<p class="indent">The spirits gave Bond instructions as to where to find the remains of multiple buildings, among them several chapels, most famously perhaps the chapel dedicated to St Edgar. The excavations conducted in 1908 and 1909 had already proved the spirits’ words to be more than just nonsense, as Bond actually found the sought-after ruins. He went on to uncover statues, tombs and carvings, secret tunnels, watercourses and drainage systems. And according to his detailed analysis in <i>The Gate of Remembrance</i> (1918), where he showed his true colors and for the first time disclosed his unconventional approach, the excavations so far had confirmed much, even most, of what the spirits had related. For example, concerning the chapel dedicated to St Edgar, the spirits had explained that <i>azure</i> glass was used in the windows. This—according to Bond, who was an expert in the field—was not to be readily expected. The more common stained glass in a 16th-century chapel in England would be toned in white and gold, and the blues often tended toward steely grey. But interestingly enough, when the Edgar Chapel was excavated, Bond found a large amount of crushed, azure glass…</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h13"/>The Loretto Chapel</p>
<p class="noindent">After some years apart, Bond and Bartlett were reunited during WWI and agreed to continue with the channeling. The first séance in the new series was held on December 4, 1916. Bond had thought the spirits would perhaps comment upon the war, whereas Bartlett had hoped for some enlightening hints concerning sacred geometry, a keen interest of his. But the spirits obstinately proceeded in their own manner, and chose to deliver new and quite detailed information pertaining to Glastonbury, in particular the beautifully decorated chapel dedicated to Our Lady of Loretto. That such a chapel really had existed was mentioned in scattered historical sources, but the evidence was partly anecdotal, and the location, let alone the specifics, of the chapel remained a mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">In the above-mentioned and later séances—the interrogation was interrupted because of the war—the spirits informed Bond where the Loretto Chapel could be found, its dimensions and how it was built. Here are a few tidbits.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Obliviscor. So long we have slept near Capella Loretta under the bank full thirty paces from the Navis. Ye did not go farre enow beyond the (bank) they cast up there. It was full five feet in, and buried in the place where he [Abbot Beere] didd drawe the Chapitre Howse […]</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The syde of it was distant from ye navis thirty-one feet and a half, and from ye aisle of ye transept he was fulle tenn feet with a covered way unto, and four steppes up unto ye aisle aforesaid. Yt…was ybuilded by Bere [Abbot Beere] most faire and wonderfull in ye newe style brought from Ytaly when he didd goe there upon ambassadrie</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">These are just a couple of examples from the large catalogue of revelations. The spirits further provided many descriptions, with accompanying sketches, of the chapel’s decorations—descriptions indicating that the style of embellishment was unknown at that time and place. No wonder, because as we have just heard, it was made in ‘ye newe style brought from Ytaly.’</p>
<p class="indent">The next phase in the excavation began some months after the end of WWI. Bond initially had trouble finding the chapel, and hence had to consult the spirits again. But they repeated the same instructions, and by taking a closer look and digging deeper, he eventually found the remains of a chapel, which would seem to closely resemble the information provided by the spirits—concerning location, size, etc. The building, which therefore appeared to be the chapel of Our Lady of Loretto, was dilapidated to an unusual extent, even for a ruin, and Bond did not have time to explore the site before he was fired. In the fourth edition of <i>The Gate of Remembrance</i> he supplies further instructions from the spirits—instructions that have yet to be implemented. It would be highly interesting, then, to see what could be in store for the person inclined to execute the spirits’ ‘last will and testament’!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h14"/>An Open Mind—the Brain Still in Place</p>
<p class="noindent">It seems that Bond did quite a good job at Glastonbury. Dr Ralegh Radford, the archaeologist excavating the site in 1962, attested that Bond’s methodology was ‘as advanced as any at the time.’ So his openness to the occult seems not to have been in conflict with a rational approach. But since it is widely believed that Bond made his momentous discovery in accordance with an ostensibly ‘irrational’ way of collecting information, we have to ask: what kind of phenomenon are we really looking at here? Could it be, as many spiritualists would likely consider, that persons from ‘the other side’—souls of deceased people, disembodied spirits—provided Bond and Bartlett with the information? Or could it rather be, in line with the model we suggest in this book, that the information was downloaded via telepathy from our collective Consciousness, the Mental Internet? Bond himself apparently was open to both these perspectives but, underscoring his rational approach, he puts more weight on the latter. He says he is inclined to think the information came from a</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>cosmic Memory, conscious or unconscious, active or latent […] embracing not only all individual experience and revivifying forgotten pages of life, but also […] involving yet wider fields, transcending the ordinary limits of time, space, and personality</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">But if one is skeptical of spiritualism, of our model and of Bond—perhaps the explanation simply could be that we are dealing here with an unusually talented archaeologist, who, with the help of his sensitive assistants, was able to eloquently ‘read’ the patterns of the site? (Medieval churches and their premises are often built according to standardized structures.) Such ‘reading’ could perhaps have been made possible through a combination of in-depth historical studies and ‘subliminal perceptions’—that the brain perceives far more of a landscape than one is consciously aware. Perhaps this is how they were able to obtain all this strangely accurate information? And that thereafter they, for some reason, mystified the process by involving spirits? Nobody knows. But what we in fact <i>do</i> know is that it was Bond, and not some conventional, hidebound archaeologist, who detected these long lost buildings.</p>
<p class="indent">The news that the Church of England was actually involved with an archaeological ‘secret service’ under the leadership of Commander Bond—<i>Bligh</i> Bond—was, as stated, not well received when it first came to light in 1918 with the release of <i>The Gate of Remembrance</i>. When the actions of secret services are brought to light, and thus are secret no more, those involved will often be compromised, and archaeology is no exception. The church felt compromised by being associated with Bond’s spiritualistic practices, and probably even more so since they actually seemed to work. In addition there was other bickering. Bond (being, after all, related to <i>HMS Bounty</i>’s notoriously headstrong Captain Bligh) was certainly not the world’s most diplomatic person, and his superiors for their part appear to have been quite smug and inflexible, exhibiting ‘the insolence of office.’ On top of this, Bond’s estranged wife ran an unusually toxic smear campaign—berating him in the press, in court and on social occasions—accusing him of a highly uncommon form of child abuse, namely that of exploiting their daughter as a spiritual medium! (The daughter sided with her father, proclaiming he had never done such a thing.)</p>
<p class="indent">So alas! after a prolonged controversy, Joseph Armitage Robinson, Dean of Wells, known for his critical research on the myths surrounding the place, sacked Frederick Bligh Bond, the man who had applied his occult resources—be they spirits, be they subliminal perceptions, be they mystifications—as a magic wand to lift the curse of oblivion, and thus conjured forth the mighty Glastonbury Abbey from the twilight of history.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h15"/>Psychic Pathfinders on Indian Lands</p>
<p class="noindent">Professor John Norman Emerson (1917–1978) did a most formidable job pertaining to the cultural history of the Huron-Iroquois First Nations people of Ontario, Canada. Emerson led no fewer than 50 excavations, he started several institutions in archaeology as well as an archaeological journal, and for a period he was also president of the Canadian Archaeological Association. Emerson differed, however, from his colleagues in that he did not limit himself to merely ‘interpreting stones and bones,’ as he dubbed it, but eventually chose to make use of ‘intuitive archaeology’—i.e. he would sometimes seek assistance from clairvoyants. And he also recommended that archaeology, as a discipline, should be open to information collected in this very unorthodox way.</p>
<p class="indent">What brought him to take his profession down this unusual road was his acquaintance with George McMullen (1920–2008). Emerson first met McMullen in a private setting, and was initially curious as well as skeptical of McMullen’s alleged psychic abilities. It all began as an innocent party game, where McMullen would get to hold some ancient artifacts and then try to come up with their particulars—location where found, age, use, etc. And astonishingly enough, according to Emerson, McMullen repeatedly provided both significant and hereto unknown information, although he neither had any qualifications nor any prior experience in archaeology. One thing led to another, and when the ‘party games’ were expanded with a similar success to include field tests at various excavation sites, Emerson became increasingly convinced that McMullen’s strange ability was genuine. And also that it was not just some kind of psychological oddity, devoid of any meaning and significance, but—as Weiant and Bond had earlier concluded—that archaeology <i>as a science</i> could benefit from ‘psychic’ persons such as McMullen.</p>
<p class="indent">McMullen had since childhood experienced a strong capability for the type of clairvoyance called psychometry, i.e. the ability to paranormally ‘read’ objects. He explains:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>As a young child I could pick up an object and by just holding it I’d know who made the object, where the object came from and who had owned the object. I’d also know about the owners of the object; where and how they had lived, whether they were still alive or had died and the manner of their death</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">This sounds preposterous, but psychometry is actually an ability that has been reported many times. McMullen had also on occasion the experience of communicating with different ‘contacts,’ i.e. beings of a spiritual nature, which would supply him with information. These contacts sound as if they could be akin to the spirits (or ‘spirits’) which, as we heard above, delivered messages to Bartlett and Bond—birds of a different feather, perhaps, but still birds… And in light of our suggested Internet model, the information contained in the ‘downloads’ could therefore conceivably stem from the bulk of information stored in the collective Consciousness, the Mental Internet, the Mental Cloud.</p>
<p class="indent">McMullen had never seen any point in such abilities, but now, through his collaboration with Emerson, a scientist of high esteem, he finally felt his powers could be applied in a valuable way. McMullen subsequently cooperated with other archaeologists, however they were usually afraid that their colleagues might find out, and therefore typically asked him to visit the excavation sites when their teammates were on holiday, and also to keep quiet about the whole affair afterwards! For a scientist to meet with a psychic is likely to be a <i>liaison dangereuse</i>, which might easily develop into a brutal career killer. If one is perceived to be unscientific or unserious it could swiftly become <i>adios</i> to collegial respect, promotions, scholarships and support. Emerson, however, enjoyed such a degree of recognition beforehand that he could afford to disregard his colleagues’ well-intentioned warnings—and they are said to have been manifold!—that he stay away from such stuff and nonsense.</p>
<p class="indent">Let us briefly hear how McMullen assisted with an excavation east of Toronto in 1973. The young archaeologist C.S. Reid, a student of Emerson, had been unable to find the palisade—the long fence encircling the settlement—that is of utmost importance when mapping a village. After two seasons of fruitless exploration, entailing filtering through tons of earth, a widespread confusion ruled, tracks led in different directions, and no one really knew what to do. Such was the situation on May 19 when George McMullen, following Emerson’s suggestion, took the matter in his own hands. He strode around the site, gesticulating and explaining what he could ‘see,’ and hot on his heels was Reid, putting white marker sticks in the earth. Within minutes McMullen ‘saw’ that large parts of the palisade had been covered by a huge heap of gravel, and said that by digging on the eastern side of this pile, remnants of the palisade would be found. He also marked its direction and added that it had not fully encircled the village. None of this was according to expectations, and hence McMullen’s information was received with skepticism. Emerson says: ‘It was completely wrong. They would not have placed a palisade there…’</p>
<p class="indent">However, it soon became clear that McMullen had been spot on: the palisade was found in accordance with his instructions, and followed the precise direction he had predicted. It also turned out that it formed a partial, not a full, enclosure of the village. McMullen had moreover said that at the end of the palisade there would be some kind of ‘cattle gate’—Reid dug, and sure enough, the gate was there!</p>
<p class="indent">McMullen spent a few days on the site in this first round, and apart from the palisade he marked the possible positions of two larger buildings. These were both found—the first of them less than 18 inches (half a meter) away from the place he had pointed out! At a later visit McMullen gave further successful indications. The only thing he seemingly got wrong was some burial places that he had marked, but which were unable to be detected by the team (though some claim these graves have since been found).</p>
<p class="indent">Anyway, what McMullen did was nothing short of impressive. If you are in Rome, it may be said with some justification that you just have to break ground and you will make archaeological finds. But in our case the sought-after structures had, as we heard, escaped the archaeologists’ keen eye for two seasons when McMullen appeared on the scene and saved the day. According to Emerson, the area was without character, flat, covered with grass, straw, shrubbery, a group of poplars and a large pile of gravel that had been dumped there in the 1950s—‘there was not much to see, I can tell you.’ So it cannot reasonably be said that McMullen’s findings were obvious. Emerson used McMullen on many other sites as well, and estimates loosely that his success rate was about 80 percent. Whereas Stephan A. Schwartz, who we will become acquainted with very soon, estimates McMullen had a score of about 70 percent. Still fairly impressive, I would say!</p>
<p class="indent">Emerson sums up his thoughts on ‘intuitive archaeology’ in the following words:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Although I do not claim that my studies have achieved the status of being scientific, neither can they be ignored or dismissed as nonsense, imagination or hallucinations. The key to the matter appears to lie in the concept of intuition. I found for my purpose a workable definition of intuition is that individuals exist who have ‘an immediate knowledge or knowing of events without the obvious use of learning or reason.’ Intuitive or psychic individuals can tell about past events and circumstances by a poorly understood process of immediate knowing. […] I propose to use an innovative approach to this understanding by combining the disciplines of archaeology, science and psychic studies</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">In truth, a most remarkable proposal from a highly respected researcher who is sometimes referred to as the ‘father’ of Canadian scientific archaeology!</p>
<p class="indent">In addition to his own clairvoyantly informed fieldwork, Emerson walked the talk by engaging in the milieu that formed the SAC, the Society for the Anthropology of Consciousness (<a href="http://www.sacaaa.org">www.sacaaa.org</a>)—a subdivision within the <i>American Anthropological Association</i>. Here all kinds of offbeat themes such as trance, altered states of consciousness and psi are dealt with simultaneously in an open-minded and scientific way. Psi, then, are the paranormal phenomena that seem to be directly related to our own consciousness, will and abilities—telepathy, clairvoyance, precognition, healing, etc.—as opposed to the phenomena apparently caused by ‘external agents’ (UFOs, ghosts, crop circles, etc.). In the bibliography there is a link to an article on ‘intuitive archaeology’ where Emerson shows how this quite special method could eventually be put into practice. And in McMullen’s book <i>One White Crow</i> can be found some entertaining and easy-to-understand lectures Emerson held on the topic.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h16"/>Indiana Schwartz and the Lost Treasures of Alexandria</p>
<p class="noindent">After his cooperation with Emerson, McMullen also engaged in other archaeological endeavors—most importantly the so-called <i>Alexandria Project</i>, led by Stephan A. Schwartz. Schwartz is certainly a colorful character in the world of archaeology, undoubtedly gifted but considered by many conventional archaeologists to be eccentric, even a bit kooky, and could perhaps be described as a kind of paranormal Indiana Jones. Schwartz has hosted spectacular expeditions and discovered shipwrecks and ruins, he cooperated with the American military in the so-called Stargate project which we will look at in <a href="07_chapter02.xhtml">chapter 2</a>, and he has also written a couple of paranormal ‘good-reads,’ <i>The Secret Vaults of Time</i> and <i>The Alexandria Project</i>, which are both classics within the intriguing fringe field of intuitive archaeology.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The Alexandria Project</i> deals with an exploration undertaken by Schwartz and his Mobius team in the huge harbor area of Alexandria, Egypt, starting back in 1978. ‘Mobius’ is a reference to the ‘Mobius strip’—a surface with only one side (take a strip of paper, twist it half a turn and glue the ends together and you’ll have it). As I was a bit uncertain as to why Schwartz had given his team such a strange name I sent him an email and asked. He wrote back that the Mobius strip, with its twisted, seamless continuity, symbolized to him ‘that the local and nonlocal were one if you only understood the twist.’ Hence the Mobius team consisted both of ‘normal crew’—divers and engineers—working ‘on location’ as well as ‘paranormal crew’—psychics, paragnosts—working ‘nonlocally’ (using clairvoyance). In addition, the team was given important external assistance from an eminent Polish archaeologist who helped to collate and interpret the resulting findings.</p>
<p class="indent">The team’s technological expertise was represented by electrical engineer Harold Edgerton, a professor at MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology). He had developed sophisticated photography and sonar systems and had earlier cooperated with the charismatic French diver, inventor, filmmaker, environmentalist and author Jacques Cousteau. The paranormal component was taken care of by no fewer than 11 psychics. Most essential were the aforementioned George McMullen, and Hella Hammid, who was a kind of real-life Sophia Hapgood. Hammid was a photographer who had worked for several years as a so-called ‘remote viewer’ on the Stargate project (see <a href="07_chapter02.xhtml">chapter 2</a>). A remote viewer is a professional clairvoyant, who uses extrasensory perception (ESP) to sense with the mind rather than with the physical senses. In the Stargate project, the American military and the CIA sought to use clairvoyance in military contexts, for example to locate military installations in foreign countries. One would think such experience to be an excellent qualification when on a mission to discover ancient ruins!</p>
<p class="indent">And indeed, in the giant Eastern Port area the Mobius team soon found many highly interesting and important architectural remains. The ensuing information is attested to by Professor Mieczyslaw Rodziewicz, a specialist in the Graeco-Roman antiquities of Egypt and then leader of the Egyptian-Polish Archaeological Mission in Alexandria. The team discovered ruins of what was probably the <i>Timonium</i>, a small ‘vacation palace’ to which Marc Antony withdrew after having been defeated by Octavian, the future Emperor Augustus. The team also found remains of an Isis temple, a major breakwater, and of what was most likely the palace of Cleopatra (yes, <i>the</i> Cleopatra!). Also discovered were a small stone sphinx, a cluster of bead-like stones, a large crown from a statue and various other objects. And last, but certainly not least, some distance outside the harbor they found huge blocks of chiseled stone that in all likelihood belonged to the impressive and almost mythical lighthouse on Pharos Island (not <i>The Faroes</i>!) This tower was considered to be one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, and according to one estimate it was about 400ft (134m) high.</p>
<p class="indent">A large part of the work underwater has been filmed, and hence these quite spectacular finds are well documented. Apart from his book, much information can be found on Schwartz’s website: <a href="http://www.stephanaschwartz.com">www.stephanaschwartz.com</a></p>
<p class="indent">Schwartz sounds surprisingly modest considering all that they found—I, for one, would undoubtedly have been euphoric if I had discovered something like the palace of Cleopatra! But it had long been known that much of old Alexandria lay submerged in the harbor area and hence that ruins of the above-mentioned edifices were probably to be found there. Schwartz therefore chooses to primarily underscore <i>the effectiveness</i> provided by the combination of technology and clairvoyance:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Other diving teams could also have found what we found, but not as quickly or as easily. It would have been extremely difficult to do several of these findings if we only had sonar to guide us. To apply search patterns would have taken many weeks. But using historical sources and the psychics we were able to make a reasonably good first estimate of what one might see on the seabed already within a few days</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">However, it turned out to be impossible for the divers to investigate the area as thoroughly as they’d hoped since the water was extremely muddy—according to Schwartz it was ‘like swimming in minestrone soup.’ (In the aftermath of the expedition, the above-mentioned professor Harold Edgerton and Schwartz co-authored a paper which was presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Underwater Archaeology, January 11, 1980.) A more in-depth exploration, both figuratively and literally, became the lot of successors with bigger budgets and more available resources. This happened in the 1990s under the auspices of a French-Egyptian cooperation led by renowned Egyptologist Jean-Yves Empereur in partnership with Franck Goddio, marine archaeologist of much acclaim. Goddio’s work was covered by the Discovery Channel—which regrettably had not existed when Schwartz’s team were in and around the Alexandrine waters (or minestrones). Today, scuba trips to the area are arranged, so that not only scientists (and psychics) but also tourists can get to see these exciting ruins.</p>
<p class="indent">Well, then—was Schwartz’s paranormal thrust into this area to be considered archaeologically valuable? Or was it just some sort of reckless adventure, of which the history of archaeology is all too rich? Heinrich Schliemann’s infamous use of dynamite to ‘excavate’ Troy, which he had newly discovered, comes to mind. (Speaking of Schliemann: Schwartz in an interview has recounted that Schliemann was led to searching for Troy at this specific site based on a series of dreams…) But let’s get back to the archaeological value of Schwartz’s foray: The assessment of Professor Mieczyslaw Rodziewicz, the above-mentioned archaeological expert, was as follows: ‘As an archaeologist with twenty years’ experience working in Alexandria, I would say the discoveries are of the highest importance […],’ and even more forcefully: ‘I, as an archaeologist, would classify it higher than the discovery even of the tomb of Alexander the Great.’ That is <i>some</i> endorsement to get from an expert within Alexandrine archaeology! It seems, then, that Indiana Schwartz because of—or perhaps some would say in spite of—his unconventional methods managed to do some pretty valuable archaeological science.</p>
<p class="indent">So, once again we have seen that important archaeological discoveries were made with the help of information obtained via clairvoyance. Such, at least, is the perception of the maverick archaeologist who made these discoveries (though I have an almost clairvoyant hunch that some slightly more conservative souls might disagree…).</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h17"/>Hunger for Mysteries in Christiania</p>
<p class="noindent">As I suppose it might entertain some readers—perhaps for more than one reason—I will conclude the chapter by recounting my own little venture into intuitive archaeology or, perhaps more correctly, intuitive historical research. A few years ago I decided to dig up some facts regarding my great-great-grandfather, Olaus Johnsen, who lived in Christiania in the mid to late 1800s. (‘Christiania’ is the old name for Oslo, the capital of Norway.) When I set out on this modest historical journey, I knew next to nothing about him, not even his name, just that he had a son (my great-grandfather) who was an architect. Clearly, I could use a little qualified help, and hence I summoned the experienced archive researcher, Terje Gudbrandson, the former chairman of the Norwegian Genealogical Society. I also had the idea of simultaneously doing a little paranormal research, just for fun. I therefore contacted a lady (she has said she prefers to remain anonymous) who on some previous occasions had impressed me with her seemingly strong psychic abilities. I told her about the project and asked what we were going to find. She then right away, without asking any questions, said that I would discover that my great-great-grandfather was far more influential than I had until now thought. And further, that he had done much to help the poor.</p>
<p class="indent">When the archives were opened a few days later, Gudbrandson could tell me that the documents showed Olaus Johnsen had gone through a most remarkable social elevation: starting out very poor (his grandfather was listed as ‘beggar’), then finding his way into manufacturing, and ending up as a very wealthy real estate developer. Among other things he built many of the tenements at Meyer-Lökken (a district close to the center), and he both dealt and socialized with the movers and shakers in Christiania. For example, the nobleman Herman Wedel Jarlsberg leased half of the second floor of Olaus’ private apartment at 2, St Olav’s Place. In those days, St Olav’s Place was a powerhouse, and number 2 was the central and most fashionable building. The walls were decorated with stucco ornaments, and in the middle of the ‘star square’ (so called because five roads meet in a node) was a water fountain with a beautiful statue of Cupid.</p>
<p class="indent">That Olaus proved to be such a big shot came as a great surprise to me. I therefore have to admit that the psychic certainly was on to something when she said that Olaus would turn out to have been far more influential than anticipated.</p>
<p class="indent">But what about the second point she mentioned, concerning helping the poor? A few days later Gudbrandson called me again. This time he had found Olaus’ last will and testament, and reading it had brought tears to his eyes. For the will, dictated by Olaus on his deathbed, instructed that large sums be used to create an endowment for health care for artisans and workers (who were often so poor that they could not afford any proper treatment). According to the statutes the sick could get financed sojourns to Sandefjord Bad, a balneological (medical bath) facility. This was Norway’s premier spa resort with an excellent medical standard for the times. And to keep spirits high, the acclaimed composer-conductor Johan Svendsen and his orchestra gave concerts for the patients, who quite often were members of the <i>glitterati</i>—the well-to-do, fashionable and glamorous. An endowment portion appears to have been equivalent to approximately £15,000/$19,500 in today’s money. And if not fully recovered after one stay—Olaus dictates, contemplating how he himself had got help for his rheumatism at Sandefjord Bad on several occasions—it was possible to arrange for another one! Such bountifulness bestowed on a sick artisan or worker must surely have been something quite out of the ordinary.</p>
<p class="indent">Then again, were the predictions of this exceptional lady just arbitrary guesses snatched out of midair? Sure, she did not provide any detailed information, that’s true. But I must admit I find it intriguing that she was able to give a fitting thumbnail sketch of the—quite unexpected—results before the ‘excavation.’ At least it seems this way to the (perhaps a little too fascinated?) author. But if this actually should be the case—that it was not just lucky guesswork on her part—perhaps it is not so strange after all. Because according to the thought experiment suggested in the introduction, i.e. the Internet model of consciousness (and I hope I still have the reader with me on that one!), all the necessary information would conceivably be available on—and could thus be downloaded from—the Mental Internet.</p>
<p class="indent">Now, I did not discover any Mayan statuettes, nor any chapel dedicated to Our Lady of Loretto, nor a palace having belonged to Cleopatra. And most of my great-great-grandfather’s fortune has long been gone because of market crashes, gambling and inflation. But I am still pleased to have discovered new parts of our family history, and some interesting buildings at Meyer-Lökken. This is particularly the case with Olaus’ own residence at 2, St Olav’s Place. In the world-famous novel <i>Hunger</i> by author and Nobel laureate Knut Hamsun (by many seen as the originator of literary modernism: James Joyce, Franz Kafka, Virginia Woolf, etc.) the main character, who most likely is Hamsun himself, is trailing two ladies—one of them being Ylajali, the woman of his feverish dreams—until they arrive at St Olav’s Place:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Outside No. 2, a large four-storied house, they turned again before going in. I leant against a lamppost near the fountain and listened for their footsteps on the stairs. They died away on the second floor. I advanced from the lamppost and looked up at the house. Then something odd happened. The curtains above were stirred, and a second after a window opened, a head popped out, and two singular-looking eyes dwelt on me. ‘Ylajali!’ I muttered, half-aloud, and I felt I grew red</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Who, then, was this mysterious Ylajali in reality? Could it have been Ida, the painter-sister of Herman Wedel Jarlsberg (Olaus’ aristocratic tenant), who often visited her brother at 2, St Olav’s Place? This is the opinion of a number of <i>literati</i>, as Hamsun is known to have had a soft spot for ladies of the Arts. Or is it more likely that the real Ylajali was Olaus’ then 22-year-old daughter, Nathalie? The protagonist in <i>Hunger</i> is delirious and hence could have twisted ‘Nathalie’ into the quite similar sounding but more exotic-romantic ‘Ylajali.’ We know that both ladies in question had at times their abode on the second floor—the very floor where Ylajali appeared… Given our focus on mystical matters, and also because the novel Hamsun wrote after <i>Hunger</i> is called <i>Mysteries</i>, it would perhaps be suitable to have a small team of intuitive or clairvoyant historians solve this piquant little historical literary riddle? I don’t know about the international learned literary community, but I am quite sure that at least Weiant, Bond, Emerson and Schwartz would all have cheered and approved!</p>
</body>
</html>