<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h18"/>Chapter 2</h2>
<h2 class="ct2">MILITARY MYSTICISM—A CLAIRVOYANT VIEW OF THE COLD WAR</h2>
<p class="h3"><a id="h19"/>Paranormal Paranoia—or Perhaps Not</p>
<p class="noindent">2009 saw the release of the movie <i>The Men Who Stare at Goats</i> featuring, among others, acting heavyweights George Clooney and Kevin Spacey. The film is based on the US military involvement with the paranormal, which included experiments where soldiers tried to kill goats by staring at them! These are weird cases and one is inclined to think of the whole thing as just one of those conspiracy theories for which the American people—with their historical roots in persecuted religious minorities—have always had an affinity: where God is eager to implement his plans, Satan is likely to conspire against it! Thus the findings from a 2013 Public Policy Polling showed that about 20 percent of Republicans and 5 percent of Democrats thought their very own President Obama to be the ‘anti-Christ’—the false Messiah mentioned in the New Testament. While a corresponding perception of former prime minister Theresa May—as the ‘Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth’ (Revelation 17:5)—is rare among Britons regardless of party. Regrettably we haven’t here the opportunity to delve into this exciting theme, which is treated in, for example, <i>American Exceptionalism</i> by Dorothea L. Madsen among other works.</p>
<p class="indent">So—given their strange nature, the incidents in <i>The Men Who Stare at Goats</i> could easily be thought of as being no more than conspiracy fantasies and the ‘fake news’ of yesterday. But as stated at the beginning of the movie: ‘More of this is truer than you would believe!’ And that is probably correct.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h20"/>The Weird Ways of War</p>
<p class="noindent">The film traces the goat-staring and other military paranormal usage back to the 1970s, when the pervasive paranoia of the Cold War created a mental climate conducive to the entrance of psi phenomena into the political arena. The reason the <i>paranormal</i> so easily bonds with <i>paranoia</i> is the emphasis on hidden connections—connections lying <i>parallel</i> to those that are obvious (<i>para</i> = beside). And given an atmosphere of fear, wherein one feels subjected to continuous surveillance, the susceptibility to lurid theories is likely to be high. In addition, the era was infused with the hippie movement and their spiritual approaches to most aspects of life. This also had an impact on a group of people who aren’t normally associated with any kind of hippie philosophy whatsoever, namely the Intelligence service. One noteworthy case is Major General Albert Stubblebine, head of the United States Army Intelligence and Security Command. Stubblebine demanded that his personnel practice bending metal using the power of thought. And on various occasions he himself tried to walk through walls! No joke, it really <i>is</i> true—on YouTube you can find videos where Stubblebine confesses his disappointment at not having succeeded.</p>
<p class="indent">So, both the paranoia and the particular spirituality of the era, the <i>Zeitgeist</i>, served to promote a strong increase in the interest in all things paranormal. In addition there were specific reasons why both military and civilian Intelligence were attracted to the potential of such phenomena. It had become clear that the Russians had been conducting exhaustive experiments of this nature for some time. This was confirmed by both Intelligence information and also via more public sources. The International Parapsychology Congress held in 1968 in Moscow made public films with the <i>paragnost</i> (i.e. a person who claims to have paranormal abilities) Nina Kulagina, where she demonstrated telekinesis by moving various physical objects, apparently with just her mental powers (clips of these films are easily found on YouTube). Kulagina was examined by many Soviet scientists including two Nobel laureates, and most of them seem to have concluded that her power was the real deal.</p>
<p class="indent">Well, it’s one thing to move inanimate objects around, but on March 10, 1970, Kulagina was reported to have taken full control of the heart of a frog: she first increased the frog’s heart rate—and then stopped it completely! A skeptical psychiatrist, who thought the reports of this event to be plain bogus, challenged Kulagina to take control over <i>his</i> heart. A military doctor, who had researched Kulagina for some years, set up an experiment where the heart rates of both Kulagina and the psychiatrist were monitored by ECG. Kulagina increased her heart rate gradually, whereas the heart rate of the psychiatrist speeded up so dramatically that—because of health concerns—the experiment was stopped after just a couple of minutes! These seemingly impressive events may of course have been based on a combination of complicity and cheating with instruments. But what if these effects were real? And what if a person with Kulagina’s abilities became bored with just controlling the hearts of frogs and volunteers, and instead directed her attention to the heart of the American President?</p>
<p class="indent">In 1972 the English parapsychologist Benson Herbert was allowed to do some experiments with Kulagina. The following happened the first time she demonstrated her powers on him: ‘[…] she held my arm and produced an intolerable sensation of heat, which I could not endure for more than two minutes.’ At a later meeting he had decided to steel himself, and from that occasion he recounts the following:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>As far as I was concerned, it felt like acute physical pain, and I had to clench my teeth and beat my forehead with my free hand in order to continue with the experiment. It soon became clear beyond doubt that the sensation was pure heat, and electrical in nature. Apart from the heat, restricted roughly to the area beneath her hand, I felt no other symptom. I cannot be sure how long I held out, but guess it was between four and five minutes, after which time I involuntarily collapsed on a nearby couch, and Kulagina released me of her own accord</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Following these experiences, Herbert no longer doubted the authenticity of the heart-stopping experiment: ‘It is now not difficult for me to believe that she can stop a frog’s heart. I think it possible that if Kulagina had maintained her grip on my arm for half an hour or so, I would have followed the way of the frog.’</p>
<p class="indent">Such reports were obviously likely to fire the imagination of an already paranoid US Intelligence service. In addition, there were rumors of Russian experiments with so-called ‘psychotronic weapons.’ These devices were said to utilize the type of energy generated by telekinesis. And if they were to be installed in a satellite, for instance, they could—at least in theory—affect the physical and mental health of people in large areas. The previous KGB general Oleg Kalugin has since confirmed that there <i>were</i>, in fact, attempts to develop such weapons. He has also—perhaps to make himself a little more interesting?—indicated that one actually managed to achieve some results. For instance, Kalugin suggested that Boris Yeltsin’s heart attack in 1991, following the coup that initiated the end of the Soviet Union, was triggered by psychotronic weapons used against him by the regime. Well, regardless of whether this is true or not, there is obviously something valid in the modern saying: ‘Just because you are paranoid doesn’t mean they <i>aren’t</i> after you!’</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h21"/>Clairvoyance—Spy Camera of the Future?</p>
<p class="noindent">However, the most extensive military projects involving paranormal capacities did not focus on completely curious stuff such as staring at goats, controlling frogs’ hearts, etc. This is possibly because such psychokinetic abilities are hard to develop and even harder to control—even according to those who are completely convinced of the possibility of cultivating such powers. But with respect to the ESP trio, telepathy, clairvoyance and precognition, the situation is very different. Quite a few of the researchers, officers and agents involved have reported developing ESP with notable success. But of course, in spite of their competence and integrity, these people cannot be regarded as neutral observers.</p>
<p class="indent">The main objective for the military was to develop what was termed ‘remote viewing.’ This is basically the same as <i>clairvoyance</i>, i.e. the experience of ‘seeing’ through inner vision, places which are unreachable by physical sight. The ‘viewer’ may also receive additional impressions and information in the form of sounds, strange ambiance, odors, etc. When cultivating remote viewing, clairvoyance is exercised in a highly structured manner, with fixed procedures and exhaustive protocols. The cultivation of such an ability is obviously potentially very useful, for instance, with regards to the location of enemy installments, transport and maneuvers.</p>
<p class="indent">The fact that the US military started to experiment with this ability was also motivated by the following: They realized that the Russians, through unknown means, had accessed sensitive military secrets. And around the same period, they acquired information that the KGB had used tens of millions of rubles to fund the training of clairvoyant spies. So doing the math, and adding a little—as the climate of the period definitely encouraged—some of the hawks were left with a nagging suspicion that it was thanks to clairvoyant spies that the Russians had accessed these secrets. They therefore concluded: ‘If the Eastern bloc has such people on its rosters, we definitely should acquire some too!’ The irony was that the Russians had possibly started <i>their</i> research based upon similar assumptions about what the Americans had achieved in the paranormal field…</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h22"/>Project Stargate</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h23"/>The Stargate Opens</p>
<p class="noindent">These were diverse projects which, in different ways and under the auspices of various personnel, involved military-oriented clairvoyant activities, such as Sun Streak, Grill Flame, and Center Lane. These projects are often subsumed under the umbrella term ‘Project Stargate,’ which is the label I will use for the sake of simplicity.</p>
<p class="indent">The first military program for remote viewing was developed by Captain Fred Holmes Atwater in 1977, and for years to come Atwater also organized the training of clairvoyant spy candidates. He describes this work in his autobiography <i>Captain of My Ship, Master of My Soul</i>, and there he also reports on some of his own paranormal experiences, which in the first place had caused him to become seriously interested in this special topic. Atwater mentions how odd it was to read discussions in the newspapers on the feasibility of remote viewing while he—according to his perception—saw it demonstrated in the laboratory every day! From his perspective the question was therefore not about the <i>existence</i> of such abilities, but rather whether they could be developed, and how reliable they eventually would become. It goes without saying that when many lives and material wealth are in the balance, as is often the case in military operations, decisions need to be based on meticulous and precise information. This aspect—the stability and reliability of the information—was also (no big surprise) decisive in the final fate of the paranormal military programs.</p>
<p class="indent">The physicists Russell Targ and Harold Puthoff at Stanford Research Institute, a renowned institution linked to Stanford University, developed much of the program’s scientific foundation, theories and training methods. Targ and Puthoff were pioneers in the field of laser technology, and had undertaken assignments for NASA and the CIA among others. Their psychic research had begun during the early 1970s. And partly based on the goodwill of the famous and infamous rocket engineer, Wernher von Braun—the main brain behind both Adolf Hitler’s V2 rockets and the American Apollo project—the project had received partial funding from NASA. Von Braun, James C. Fletcher (the administrator of NASA) and others were standing on a pier, chatting informally during a conference, when Targ suggested that his and Puthof’s psychic project should receive financial support. Von Braun then turned to Fletcher and said: ‘Oh, give him the money, Jim. We all know that this stuff is real. My grandmother always knew when the trains would crash or when someone was about to die.’ Targ and Puthoff became known to the public in the wake of their experiments with Uri Geller—the Israeli magician, illusionist, medium or whatever we might call him (he refers to himself as a ‘mystifier’)—who rose to international stardom based on his paranormal (or perhaps ‘paranormal’) demonstrations on TV, where he seemingly excelled both in telepathy and the telekinetic ‘bending of spoons.’</p>
<p class="indent">As Targ and Puthoff were developing the techniques for remote viewing they were assisted by the artist Ingo Swann (1933–2013), who some would consider to be an exceptionally talented psychic. In addition Targ and Puthoff got help to look into the theoretical aspects from some talented, playful and imaginative ‘hippie physicists’ from the so-called Fundamental Fysiks Group at Berkeley. We will become acquainted with this exciting pack of scientists in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">In their book <i>Mind-Reach: Scientists Look at Psychic Abilities</i> (1977) Targ and Puthoff explain the basic methods used to cultivate remote viewing abilities in the test subjects. The main features of the technique are quite simple: While the test subject—the remote viewer—is stationed in the laboratory, a member of the research team jumps in the car and drives to another location where there is a ‘target.’ This target has characteristics that are easily recognizable. It can, for instance, be a building with a special shape, a unique natural form or anything with a distinct visual identity. When the experiment starts, the remote viewer tries to ‘see’—by visualizing, acquiring images, feeling, associating, sensing, etc.—what the target looks like. The viewer then sketches the most characteristic traits of the target, say, an oval pool, a triangular tower, a meandering river, a cliff shaped like a half moon, etc. The viewer also gives an accompanying verbal description of what she/he sees, feels, senses, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">Targ and Puthoff maintain that the majority of around 100 test subjects actually managed to develop certain remote viewing abilities within the space of a few months. However, very few acquired consistency in their results.</p>
<p class="indent">The Stanford Research Institute remote viewing exploration became integrated in the military Stargate program during 1977–1978. It was subsequently classified with restrictions that lasted until 1995. After the research became directed toward military usage, the remote viewers would typically be recruited from among soldiers—often personnel who repeatedly had managed to survive under ‘impossible’ conditions. The assumption was that these individuals might have a well-developed sixth sense that had helped them to pull through against all odds.</p>
<p class="indent">Due to a limited number of suitable candidates and qualified trainers, only a small number went through the training to become remote viewers/clairvoyant spies. Through the years Stargate seems to have had about 20–25 remote viewers employed—successively, not all at once—and some 40 inner-circle personnel.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h24"/>The Taurus Experiment—Clairvoyance from the Deep</p>
<p class="noindent">In 1977, a field-oriented slant was given to some experiments conducted by Stephan Schwartz (the psychic archaeologist we got to know in <a href="06_chapter01.xhtml">chapter 1</a>) on board the mini-submarine <i>Taurus</i>. The boat, which was brand new, was at the Institute for Marine and Coastal Studies, University of Southern California, for her sea trials. The Institute graciously financed the sub, the surface support ship and all the people involved in the operation for three days to help Schwartz carry out the Deep Quest study. During the experiment, the submarine with the viewer on board was submerged hundreds of miles out in the Pacific, at depths varying between 80–170 meters (260–560 feet) according to the reports. The idea was, among other things, to check if distance, the water shield, and electromagnetic isolation would impact the viewer’s abilities. Because of space considerations I’ll restrict myself to describing only select episodes from the experiment (protocol is found in the bibliography).</p>
<p class="indent">A pair of experimenters, a ‘target demarcation team,’ would visit a site (that the viewer had no prior information about), and the viewer would then attempt to ‘see,’ describe and sketch it. The first site visited was a giant oak on a hilltop in the Portola Valley in California. The viewer, Hella Hammid—located in the submerged submarine out in the Pacific—closed her eyes for a moment, then said in a rush: ‘A very tall, looming object. A very, very, huge tall tree and a lot of space behind them. There almost feels like there is a cliff or drop-off behind them.’ Not a bad description, considering that she was located deep in the ocean, hundreds of miles away! The other site visited was a shopping mall in Mountain View, California. The viewer, now Ingo Swann, described it—correctly—as follows: ‘flat stone flooring, walls, small pool, reddish stone walk, large doors, walking around, an enclosed space,’ and made a sketch descriptive of the site. Barring collusion between the researchers and the viewer, such accurate representation is difficult to explain. And don’t take my word for it!—the reports, including photos from the sites and the viewer’s sketch, are found in the bibliography, giving you the opportunity to make up your own mind.</p>
<p class="indent">Related experiments tested the ability to ‘see’ pictures (rather than sites). A viewer would be asked to describe a picture located several kilometers away (these experiments were land-based). The report describes the first three trials as follows: The ﬁrst target picture chosen by the experimenters was a photograph of the Cheops pyramid in Egypt. The subject person (the remote viewer) depicted a square building in a dry place. He felt that his arms and hands were being bandaged, and his head and face also. He thought of the word ‘mummy.’ The second picture was a painting of a gorilla looking out of a window. The subject reported seeing a disﬁgured black man with his face cut in half by something (the window frame). The third picture showed ﬁshing boats on a Mexican lake. The main elements of the subject’s descriptions were ‘seafood’ and ‘the ocean.’</p>
<p class="indent">These are of course not <i>perfect</i> descriptions of the pictures. Nevertheless, the degree of accuracy seems much too great to be dismissed as ‘purely coincidental.’ As with the first case, I see here only two possibilities: 1) complicity or 2) authentic clairvoyance. The second alternative is of course very convenient for our model of a Mental Internet!</p>
<p class="indent">An everyday version of such an experiment could be staged in the following way: You travel to, say, Paris, and settle in front of the Eiffel Tower with a laptop hosting a webcam. You then start to chat with a friend who is downtown (or in a submarine, if you happen to know a crew member). This person will probably be able to quickly describe your environment relatively well: ‘Braid-like metal structure in the background, seems to be tall, even monumental, arches beneath, an urban environment, people going to and fro.’ And voilà!—you have remote viewing à la internet. I am the first to admit that it may sound simplistic to depict an apparently mystical ability in such a trivial way. Nevertheless, if our consciousness actually has a collective dimension—that we are all connected on some level—the example may be a good approximation of the way this ability functions.</p>
<p class="indent">Remote viewing, given that the phenomenon is real, is an application of <i>clairvoyance</i>. But as there were people present by the targets, perhaps the aforementioned episodes could just as well be seen as an application of <i>telepathy</i>—that staff members had accidentally acted as ‘transmitters.’ This is an interesting question that I think would be impossible to answer. It is quite often hard to differentiate between <i>clairvoyance</i> (where information is downloaded from the Mental Internet without a specific ‘sender’) and <i>telepathy</i> (where the information stems from a specific person). When using <i>clairvoyance</i> in a military connection one attempts to directly ‘see’ landscapes, buildings, things or activities of strategic importance. While using <i>telepath</i>y in a similar context, one would rather attempt to ‘read’ the thoughts and plans of, for instance, an important enemy general. Such use of telepathy has almost certainly been attempted, but within Stargate the focus was on the development and use of clairvoyance.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h25"/>Shaken and Stirred, and the Need for Martinis</p>
<p class="noindent">Well, then, how did the remote viewers perform? Puthoff maintains that the results were sometimes so staggering that they were scared to report them—they feared they wouldn’t be believed! Such cases were called ‘eight martinis’—an Intelligence expression for events so shocking that one has to wash down eight martinis to regain one’s composure. An early ‘eight martini’ occurred when a policeman, Pat Price, and the artist Ingo Swann, two of the most trusted remote viewers in the early days, were independently given a set of latitude and longitude coordinates. Both men gave quite similar descriptions of the location (in West Virginia). The descriptions were not perfect, but still surprisingly good. But what led to an acute need for the eight martinis was Price’s depiction of a top secret, underground military installation at the location! Moreover, Price gave a telling characterization of the activities in this installation; among others the use of code names with references to pool—cue ball, cue stick, etc. According to Puthoff, who at the time was not aware of the installation, all of this was confirmed in retrospect. I assume that the martini cocktails mixed by Targ and Puthoff that evening became more than normally shaken, as they themselves clearly must have been both shaken <i>and</i> stirred!</p>
<p class="indent">Pat Price was also impressive in one of the most famous police cases from the period—in fact, one of the most famous police cases of all time. On February 5, 1974, Stanford Research Institute was asked to assist the police with the Hearst case. Patricia Hearst, granddaughter of the media mogul Randolph Hearst, had disappeared the day before and the police hadn’t a clue about the circumstances or her whereabouts. Amazingly, Price could tell them that the disappearance was a kidnapping, but one that primarily had been politically—not financially—motivated. And from a large police catalogue of mug shots, Price identified as suspects three people from the Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA)—an extreme, leftwing urban guerrilla group, which staged robberies and used violent means. Later it transpired that it <i>was</i>, in fact, this particular group that had kidnapped Hearst, and also had managed to brainwash her into taking part in a bank robbery. A photo showing Hearst holding a machine gun during the robbery has become one of the iconic images of the 1970s. Price also managed to locate the car of the kidnappers. And although the information he provided did not become decisive in the release of Hearst, the <i>accuracy</i> of the information remains mind-boggling—assuming, of course, that the story is correctly recounted.</p>
<p class="indent">Some critics, among them the well-known skeptic Martin Gardner, have pointed to the fact that several of the remote viewers were connected to the Church of Scientology. This is no surprise because back then the Church of Scientology was one of the few organizations that had training programs designed to activate paranormal abilities; if you’re interested in learning kung fu, it makes sense to join a kung fu club! Nevertheless, Gardner maintained that this link could have created an ‘unholy alliance,’ and thus influenced <i>which</i> results were included in the reports and <i>how</i> they were reported. This is surely a legitimate point of view. But as the public evaluation of Stargate did not arouse any suspicion that the results had been manipulated in any way, such insinuations have to be put on Gardner’s tab.</p>
<p class="indent">Puthoff resigned as project manager in 1985. The particle physicist Edwin C. May subsequently became the most prominent administrative and scientific leader within Stargate. My friend, the film maker Terje Toftenes, interviewed May in October 2017—the link is found in the literature list. During May’s tenure success was reported in a number of cases, among others an incident regarding a spy suspect arrested in South Africa. A remote viewer ‘saw’ that the suspect had used a radio transmitter hidden in a pocket calculator to smuggle information. When confronted with this paranormally acquired information, the spy confessed and chose to cooperate. Other cases, under much more dramatic circumstances, took place during the Gulf War (1991). Here Stargate’s remote viewers reportedly assisted in locating both SCUD missiles and hidden laboratories designed for research in biological and chemical warfare. Tunnels and underground military installations are also said to have been detected with their help. These accounts are based upon sources with connections to the project; hence they might have had a vested interest in promoting the enterprise.</p>
<p class="indent">But we have also had external confirmation of Stargate successes, one even stemming from the very highest levels. According to <i>Reuters</i>, President Jimmy Carter confirmed in a speech to students at Emory College, Atlanta on September 20, 1995, that during his term as President (1977–81) a ‘special plane’ (probably a Russian spy plane) that had crashed in the Congo was found with the help of remote viewing. Carter recounted that detailed searches with spy satellites had failed to find any traces of the wreck. Then, without Carter’s knowledge, the CIA had proceeded to put a remote viewer on the job. Carter reported that, ‘She gave some latitude and longitude figures. We focused our satellite cameras on that point and the plane was there.’ Unless Carter was fundamentally misled by CIA Director Stansfield Turner (they were classmates at the US Naval Academy in Annapolis, and Turner was sworn in to the CIA position by Carter, but one never can be fully sure with these Intelligence people!), it certainly looks as though Stargate can record a very satisfactory result in this case.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h26"/>The Stargate Closes</p>
<p class="noindent">Regardless of such positive reports, Stargate was closed in 1995 after having completed no less than 504 separate spying missions. The CIA, which eventually had taken over the coordination of activities, requested that the American Institutes for Research perform an evaluation. They employed two external consultants with no link to Stargate, who then evaluated a (very small) selection of the experiments. One of these consultants was Jessica Utts, a statistics professor with several published textbooks in her field. She contended that the viewers had significant scores 34 percent of the time, which was far beyond what one could expect if one had used good, old-fashioned guessing. Utts declared:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>The statistical results of the studies examined are far beyond what is expected by chance. Arguments that these results could be due to methodological flaws in the experiments are soundly refuted. Effects of similar magnitude to those found in government-sponsored research at SRI and SAIC have been replicated at a number of laboratories across the world. Such consistency cannot be readily explained by claims of flaws or fraud</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Utts goes on to say, ‘Using the standards applied to any other area of science, it is concluded that psychic functioning has been well established.’ So, backed by a substantial amount of other research within the field, Utts quite categorically concluded that Stargate’s results could not be attributed to chance or faults in the experimental procedures. And on this basis she recommended that Stargate should continue.</p>
<p class="indent">The other external consultant was Ray Hyman—a psychology professor and magician, and also a notorious debunker of the paranormal; it would be tempting to describe Hyman as a ‘celebrity skeptic.’ Hyman starts his report by commenting that Stargate represents a marked step forward with commendable improvements as regards scientific methods. And he agrees with Utts that the positive statistics are difficult to explain.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>We agree that the effect sizes reported in the SAIC experiments are too large and consistent to be dismissed as statistical flukes […] I tend to agree with Professor Utts that real effects are occurring in these experiments. Something other than chance departures from the null hypothesis has occurred in these experiments</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Still Hyman maintains that the ‘something’ that occurred does not need to be successful remote viewing. He hints that the effects (i.e. the positive statistics) could perhaps be attributed to undiscovered faults in the methodology.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Although I cannot point to any obvious flaws in the experiments, the experimental program is too recent and insufficiently evaluated to be sure that flaws and biases have been eliminated</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">As we can see, Hyman was not convinced by the results. But interestingly he <i>does</i> explicitly say that he has not been able to find any faults or mistakes. At the end of his report he provides suggestions for future research. Among others, he suggests evaluations should be left to fully independent judges—i.e. experts without any prior knowledge of either the targets or the viewers involved.</p>
<p class="indent">The committee which evaluated the fate of Stargate was—take note!—not interested in remote viewing per se, but focused on the eventual military value of such an ability. The reports from Utts and Hyman were an essential part of the decision-making process. And with one of these experts not convinced that remote viewing was a reality at all, the committee, after a short deliberation, concluded that Stargate didn’t have adequate military usefulness to merit further support. Among the reasons stated was the following:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>The information provided by remote viewing is vague and ambiguous, making it difficult, if not impossible, for the technique to yield information of sufficient quality and accuracy of information for actionable intelligence. Thus, we conclude that continued use of remote viewing in intelligence gathering operations is not warranted</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">The committee recommended that Stargate be phased out—a recommendation quickly followed up by the CIA. And so it happened that the Stargate was closed, barred and bolted!</p>
<p class="indent">Some informed sources have claimed that the closure was partially motivated by stigma: many top military officials found it embarrassing to be involved with an oddball project that so far had only a <i>possible</i> value. Several of them wanted to <i>use</i> Stargate, but very few wanted to be associated with it. The fear of being regarded as ridiculous was great, and obviously not without reason. Stargate had become one of the many hot potatoes of the Cold War, and as the well-known viewer Joe McMoneagle put it: ‘Anybody associated with it could kiss their career goodbye.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h27"/>Some Thoughts in Retrospect</p>
<p class="noindent">Stargate was a long and relatively comprehensive project. It is estimated that the various component programs, which sometimes ran simultaneously and also partially replaced each other, were active for roughly 20 years with a total budget of approximately 20–25 million dollars. Even if the budget was quite modest—adjusted for price index increases it equals about 40 million dollars in 2020—the accrued documentation was quite formidable. Among the American public institutions and bureaux which at one point were involved in Stargate we find the CIA, FBI, Defense Intelligence Agency, National Security Council, National Security Agency, Secret Service, US Special Forces Command, Drug Enforcement Agency, Navy, Army, Air Force, and the US Customs. In other words, a most powerful motley crew you wouldn’t want to have as enemies! Russell Targ once humorously commented that this was the <i>really</i> paranormal thing about Stargate; that this strange program was treated with positive interest by the authorities over such a long period! But all things must pass, and as previously stated, the magic faded in 1995 and Stargate was closed.</p>
<p class="indent">A substantial amount of the internal documents has been declassified. Since 2004, anyone interested has been able—funnily enough—to order this material directly from the CIA. In January 2017, the CIA released even more documents which can now be downloaded freely from their own website. By studying the roughly 100,000 declassified pages you can reach your own opinion on Stargate. Note that when visiting and using the CIA website you may be registered by those states spying on the USA—perhaps not a very pleasant thought… So let me give a mention to the informative website of Daz Smith, an English viewer who had part of his training within Stargate: <a href="http://www.remoteviewed.com/">http://www.remoteviewed.com/index.htm</a>. Here one can download a selection of the Stargate documents released by the CIA. Smith has told me that there are parts of the Stargate material that still remain unpublished, and that in the published documents sections have been blacked out and removed…</p>
<p class="indent">Most of us would probably want a slightly easier approach than having to trawl through piles of documents, and to that end I have the pleasure of announcing that we are fortunate, as various insiders have written about Stargate. <i>Reading the Enemy’s Mind: Inside Star Gate, America’s Psychic Espionage Program</i> by retired army major Paul Smith gives an excellent overview. Major Smith was associated with the project during the period 1983–1990 and was a remote viewing instructor of the utmost importance. Also Russell Targ, the physicist who for so many years was one of the ‘backroom boys,’ has published a string of books germane to the theme. And from the outsiders we have journalist Jim Schnabel’s classic <i>Remote Viewers: The Secret History of America’s Psychic Spies</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">As a little service to those readers who want to proceed in making their own attempts at remote viewing, I have included a link to a brief ‘Do-it-yourself’ instruction written by the aforementioned Major Paul Smith. There is also a link to the original training manual used within Stargate, which neatly sums up the basic methods, and which also explains some of the theoretical foundations. When reading it I was suddenly struck with the thought that the movie <i>The Matrix</i>, considered one of the greatest science fiction films ever, may conceivably have been inspired by this training manual; this includes the film’s title, as one of the central concepts in the manual is—‘matrix’!</p>
<p class="indent">As far as I have ascertained, virtually all the people previously involved in Stargate claim that remote viewing is an undeniable reality—this includes the physicists, the officers and the agents (though these people are, of course, not unbiased observers). At the same time, all of them have admitted that there were problems involved in basing military decisions on this highly arbitrary ability. Nevertheless, several of the more high-profile agents have managed to develop careers based on purported clairvoyant proficiency acquired through their training within Stargate. Some of them have been employed as advisors by companies searching for oil and other natural resources. And some have used their alleged paranormal powers to assist police and other organizations searching for missing persons. The artist Ingo Swann, one of the creators of the methods used in Stargate, has stated that it is a heavy burden to work with such cases; this is because it often entails ‘seeing’ abuse, murders, rotting corpses, etc. Swann has reported being successful in only three of 25 attempts. (He was apparently not satisfied with this.) Whereas Joe McMoneagle, who—given his professional military background—is probably a much more robust viewer, claims to have given a fairly accurate location of the missing person in 10 of the 26 cases he has been involved in as of 2012. If this is correct, hats off to him!</p>
<p class="indent">McMoneagle was also the first of the military remote viewers and had a marked James Bond flair to his ID code—namely 001. He currently has the highest public profile of the former Stargate viewers, and in addition to his books and lectures he has participated in television programs. On such occasions he has demonstrated his special abilities close to 100 times. To appear on live TV demonstrating remote viewing is brave; however, not everyone has been overwhelmingly impressed—the well-known skeptic Brian Dunning said that what impressed him most was the editing of the television recordings!</p>
<p class="indent">Let me also mention that McMoneagle has become something of a star in Japan after having appeared a number of times on Japanese television. He has assisted the Japanese police in solving cold cases, and he has also been involved in psychic archaeology with the aim of finding the historical truth about Himiko, the famed shamaness-queen of Yamatai-koku, an ancient Japanese kingdom.</p>
<p class="indent">There are several videos of McMoneagle available, so it is possible to see an experienced viewer in action—and perhaps thereby also to form an opinion of his abilities?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h28"/>Glimpses from Behind the Iron Curtain</p>
<p class="noindent">Stargate was developed as a response to real as well as imagined paranormal research conducted in the Eastern bloc—in particular, of course, the Russian activities. At the same time the former Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria were also carrying out parapsychological research of high quality, but the Russians were the most eager, and had reportedly between 20 and 50 (estimates vary quite a bit) institutes working on partially military-oriented paranormal research. Mention of this will perhaps bring to some readers’ minds, particularly if they are chess players, the legendary 1972 World Chess Championship match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky that took place in Reykjavik, Iceland. Accusations of every imaginable form of manipulation and trickery were swirling all over the place—and no wonder. The Russian chess team had help from a parapsychologist, and Reykjavik suddenly had a surprise visit from Fischer’s brother-in-law—none other than Russell Targ of Stargate! This apparently innocent match was in fact significant propaganda as it was seen as a fight between the Eastern bloc and Western systems. Thus both sides most probably applied paranormal as well as normal means in their attempts to secure the victory/take home the prize.</p>
<p class="indent">We are aware of such curiosities, but the true extent of military-oriented paranormal activities within the Eastern bloc during the Cold War is still relatively unknown. Testimonies from eyewitnesses presumed credible do exist; Oleg Kalugin’s description of psychotronic weapons has been mentioned, and Larissa Vilenskaya, an engineer and parapsychologist who emigrated to the US in 1981, has reported that talented mediums were recruited to use telepathy, in the more literal sense, to ‘psyche out’ the leaders of other countries when they appeared on television! Another program was focused on internal politics: according to the biochemist and parapsychologist Milan Ryzl, with whom we shall soon become acquainted, the aim was to use telepathic hypnosis to ‘re-educate’ (= brainwash) antisocial elements, i.e. opposition and criminals (groups which then were often surprisingly analogous…).</p>
<p class="indent">Through the years popular books have been published on this topic, such as <i>Remote Viewing: History and Science of Psychic Warfare and Spying</i> by Tim Rifat (1999). An older easily accessible work is <i>Psychic Warfare: Threat or Illusion</i> by Martin Ebon (1983). Both books contain interesting information but do not discriminate well enough between the facts and paranoia. An even earlier account was <i>Psychic Discoveries Behind the Iron Curtain</i> (1970) by journalists Sheila Ostrander and Lynn Schroeder. This is probably the most popular classic that contains the most extensive information on Cold War paranormal activities within the Eastern bloc. Ostrander and Schroeder have a flair for the fantastic, and there is a sensationalist slant to their book. Still, <i>Psychic Discoveries Behind the Iron Curtain</i> provides valuable information as the authors were ‘on location.’ In 1968 they visited the International Parapsychology Congress in Moscow and afterwards they traveled in other Eastern Europe countries, interviewing psi researchers.</p>
<p class="indent">The sensationalist slant in popular works is quite understandable and to some extent also forgivable; one wants to increase the ‘wow factor’ so as to sell as many books as possible. More troublesome is when the same weakness also pertains to the primary sources, as different firsthand reports from the Eastern bloc appear to be conflicting: some sources say the paranormal programs were enormous, whereas other sources downplay their importance. An example of the first kind of source is former KGB General Boris Ratnikov, who was responsible for various psychic operations. In an interview with the <i>Russian Gazette</i> in 2006 Ratnikov said:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>You can’t even conceive what sort of war of minds was unfolding in this field in the first half [sic!] of the twentieth century. I’d hardly be exaggerating if I say that sometimes real ‘astral’ [an occult term denoting ‘psychic’] battles were waged. And all of this was classified and camouflaged, probably no less than the nuclear project</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Ratnikov further explains that the main practical purpose for the Russian research was to be able to exercise distant influence/control of the human psyche.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Around 50 institutes in our country studied the possibilities of acting on the psyche remotely. Expenditures for these goals were counted in the hundreds of millions of rubles. And although the investments justified themselves, the results we got were not developed</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Ratnikov also gives a couple of concrete examples of their activities:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Back at the beginning of the 1990s, we ‘worked’ with Robert Strauss, the new US ambassador in Russia. Having read his thoughts, we came to the conclusion that within the embassy there was a device for psychotronic influence on Muscovites, but it was deactivated. We also received other information from his subconscious. […] A couple of weeks before the start of the bombardment of Yugoslavia by American aviation, we held a séance to connect with the subconscious of Secretary of State Madeline Albright. […] First of all, within Madame Albright’s thoughts we discovered a pathological hatred for Slavs. She was also incensed that Russia possessed the largest reserves of minerals in the world. In her opinion, in the future not just one country should dispose of Russian reserves, but all humanity under the supervision, of course, of the United States</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Well, well, well—I must say… Ratnikov has, in fact, impressive military credentials and unless he has severe mental problems, or a personal interest in lying—giving us ‘alternative facts,’ as it is called in the Trump era—I would say that the typical Cold War paranoia becomes more than partly justified by such depictions! The Russians were apparently both heavily investing in, and also practically applying, this most curious form of weaponry.</p>
<p class="indent">But Ratnikov’s statements seem to be countered/modified by that of other high-ranking officers. 2015 saw the release of a book called <i>ESP Wars East &amp; West: An Account of the Military Use of Psychic Espionage as Narrated by the Key Russian and American Players</i> (Edwin C. May, Victor Rubel and Loyd Auerbach). As of today this is probably the best book on the market pertaining to the theme (but I am aware that parts of its representations are considered tendentious by some and are being challenged). Here, former KGB Major General Nikolai Sham seems to be painting a more modest picture of the Russian paranormal activities. Sham is quoted as saying that: ‘There was nothing comparable to the U.S. Star Gate program.’</p>
<p class="indent">Even if their names might seem to suggest otherwise—Ratnikov, Sham—both are men of merit and high standing, so who to trust? Neither being a telepath nor a prophet myself, I can still hear a little voice telling me that the FSB (the descendants of the mighty KGB) will not release a single page from their archives even if I bribe them with the best vodka and the best caviar and in addition ask politely. And since my own remote viewing abilities are not that well developed I can’t rely on them either to peep into the subterranean bunkers in Moscow or gaze over the vast steppe of Siberia. Therefore I recently (January 2017) contacted three different Russia experts—a former professor in Russian History at the University of Oslo, and two fulltime researchers at NUPI, Norsk Utenrikspolitisk Institutt (the Norwegian Institute of Foreign Policy)—but none of them knew of reliable sources related to this peculiar aspect of the Russian secret services. Then I tried to contact Andrei Soldatov, who is running Agentura.ru, a website frequently used as a source on Russian affairs by international media, but Mr Soldatov did not respond. Apparently we still have some way to go before being able to get a valid picture of the ‘para’-military activities of the Eastern bloc, comparable to what we have of Stargate following the CIA release of documents.</p>
<p class="indent">So for now, I think we’ll have to content ourselves with having a brief look at the more civilian part of the activities. I purposely write ‘more civilian’ since during the Cold War civilian research in many fields was also, to a large extent, regarded as part of the East–West conflict.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h29"/>The Red Square—Not Square At All</p>
<p class="noindent">It is clear that the scientists in Eastern Europe were researching all the phenomena that were being studied in the West: telepathy, clairvoyance, precognition, telekinesis, healing, etc. And furthermore, that this was by and large done within the framework of the so-called ‘diamat,’ <i>dialectical materialism</i>, which was the obligatory philosophy in communist regimes. Therefore the phenomena were not viewed in light of some kind of spiritual New Age or ‘hippie philosophy,’ even though researchers like Professor Giorgi Lozanov had visited India to study yogis. Accordingly with this ‘hard’ and purely materialistic approach, Eastern bloc researchers would often explain psi phenomena as being caused by low-frequency electromagnetic waves, or eventually by forms of energy so far undetected by classical science.</p>
<p class="indent">In Eastern Europe, psi research typically involved the use of hypnosis and also various forms of electrical equipment. Among these was the well-known ‘Kirlian photography’—a photographic imaging of the bioelectric field (the ‘aura’) surrounding all living beings. Another project focused on developing ‘psychotronic dynamos’ with the purpose of generating and concentrating the type of energy supposedly involved in telekinesis (the ‘spoon-bending’ type of energy). This energy was to be used for healing, but was also thought to have the potential for far darker deeds… When reading about all this, one senses a strange ambience: a mixture of Gothic, Red Square, and science fiction—as if Frankenstein, Stalin and Arthur C. Clarke were to lock hands and perform a circle dance. (And by the way, Stalin himself was fascinated by the paranormal, and had witnessed persuasive demonstrations by the famed medium Wolf Messing.) One also senses a <i>dead end</i>—that history has taken another route forever.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h30"/>Two Wise Men from the East: Milan Ryzl and Giorgi Lozanov</p>
<p class="noindent">Two prominent researchers among the greats of Eastern European parapsychology who have directly influenced the West are the recently deceased professors Milan Ryzl (1928–2011) and Giorgi Lozanov (1926–2012). These men also had an explicit humanistic and spiritual agenda, which far exceeded the confines of both the laboratory and the era.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h31"/>From Czechoslovakia With Love—Milan Ryzl</p>
<p class="noindent">Toward the end of the 1960s, the Czech biochemist and parapsychologist Milan Ryzl chose a one-way ticket to the West, after many years of the Communist regime taking a rather sinister interest in his research. Ryzl had focused on hypnosis as a means of developing ESP in his volunteers, and through the years he systematically hypnotized several hundred people for this purpose. He has estimated that approximately 10 percent of the volunteers developed reasonable abilities for telepathy, clairvoyance and precognition. The official interest in Ryzl’s research is said to have increased greatly following reports that his students had won the national Lottery several weeks running! Ryzl contended that the Lottery was an excellent training ground for precognition, and had developed a unique symbol system that the students used to more easily identify the winning combinations.</p>
<p class="indent">But the authorities wanted Ryzl to not limit his multifaceted expertise to Lottery stakes; rather they asked him to use it in good old-fashioned spying on Western colleagues, combined with paranormal surveillance as later employed by Stargate. But the invitation he received was what in <i>Godfather</i> terminology is called ‘an offer you can’t refuse.’ As Ryzl had too much integrity to accept any kind of sleazy spying assignment, he soon experienced being followed by agents and having his manuscripts stolen. This was not an expression of personal paranoia: during the early 1970s, the award-winning American psychologist Stanley Krippner went on a study trip to Eastern Europe, and he confirmed that there was—in keeping with the spirit of the times—extensive monitoring of parapsychologists. In his book <i>Human Possibilities: Mind Exploration in the USSR and Eastern Europe</i>, Krippner reports that films showing experiments with telekinesis had to be smuggled across the border with utmost care. And Edward Naumov, one of the most well-known Russian parapsychologists, was in fact sent to a labor camp because of his ‘incorrect’ association with Western researchers.</p>
<p class="indent">After some time Ryzl found the situation unbearable, and in 1967 he managed an escape worthy of an agent, including a border crossing at night and shifting between diverse escape cars. Many might view the following as a textbook example of a self-fulfilling prophecy, but Ryzl actually claims that a psychic friend had prophesied his dramatic escape—including both the escape route and specific details—no less than 15 years in advance!</p>
<p class="indent">Ryzl ended up in the US, where for many years he generously shared his parapsychological capabilities with universities. He also wrote some 20 books on the topic and published over 100 scientific articles. Many of his works are mainly theoretical, but Ryzl was also a practical man who wanted to touch people’s lives—his book <i>How to Develop ESP in Yourself and Others</i> (1973) is an example of this.</p>
<p class="indent">Ryzl contended that parapsychology should not limit itself to providing explanations for so-called anomalies, phenomena that appear to be in contradiction to the laws of nature (<i>a</i> = not, <i>nomos</i> = law). He thought that parapsychology should have a much bolder and broader objective. Ryzl believed that modern humanity experiences an unfortunate and unnecessary divide between science and religion—‘religion’ understood not as dogma, but as contact with the deeper, spiritual dimensions. By conveying the psi phenomena and their mysterious world and by helping to integrate them into the story of our lives, parapsychology, according to Ryzl, could assist in bridging this unhealthy divide, and could thus positively affect Western culture at large. We could come to see ourselves as heroes and heroines on a quest, not just as purposeless puppets without any higher meaning in life than to consume, pay our taxes and then die.</p>
<p class="indent">To apply parapsychology as a therapy for Western culture is no small ambition, and might sound too optimistic. Regardless, Ryzl’s <i>diagnosis</i> probably makes good sense. Diverse thinkers, for instance Mikhail Bhaktin, C.G. Jung, Gaston Bachelard and Michel Foucault, have maintained that the modern Western trend to <i>rationalize</i> is often characterized by abuse and oppression, exacting a high price. The parts of our character that do not fit the rational, the well-ordered, the productive, tend to be powerfully denigrated—even dismissed. The aforementioned thinkers, and also a number of others, have pointed out that our earlier history provided more space for the irrational, for the so-called crazy, the unproductive, and also for the realm of trances and ecstasy. And they all seem to be in agreement that humanity has lost something substantial through the modern fear of such ‘anarchistic’ experiences.</p>
<p class="indent">Might it be that with our rationality, our ‘square’ lives and tendency to stick to ‘the way things have always been done,’ we reduce access to the <i>Transcendent</i>, the <i>Realm of the Gods</i>, i.e. the spheres going beyond our daily trivialities: Love, Art, Music, Holiness, Ecstasy, Meetings, Mystery, Meaning—in short, all those experiences which lift us up, and confirm us to be more than just biological robots? Might the hesitant attitude toward psi and the paranormal in modern Western culture also be part of this unnecessary and unhealthy limitation?</p>
<p class="indent">In his book <i>Ancient Oracles</i>, Ryzl goes back to the Mediterranean cultures of antiquity and portrays the central role of oracles and mysticism; humankind then had a completely different sensitivity toward the sixth sense, to the ‘Voice of the Gods.’ Through his experiments with ESP and hypnosis, with his books and articles, Ryzl not only wants to map an unknown part of reality, he also wants to act as a bridge builder across the gap between religion and empirical science, and to teach us to interpret the symbolism of the spirit, to reopen the road to the transcendent—to the Kingdom of the Gods. In truth, this <i>is</i> an ambitious project! But, then, nothing ventured…</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h32"/>‘The Limitlessness of Mind’—Giorgi Lozanov</p>
<p class="noindent">The Bulgarian psychiatrist Giorgi Lozanov is best known in the West as the founder of <i>Suggestopedia</i>. This is a teaching method that many, including a UNESCO panel, have held to be conducive to fast language training (so-called ‘super learning’), but of which others have been critical. The method uses games, drama, music and different art forms, including yoga techniques, to activate the slumbering resources within our consciousness. But Lozanov was not only a pedagogue, he was also one of the most respected parapsychologists in Eastern Europe, and furthermore an expert on hypnosis and altered states of consciousness. For many years Lozanov led a government-funded laboratory in Sofia, which became known as the Institute for Suggestology and Parapsychology. Here he had available the most advanced mind-mapping equipment of the day, and the institute employed no fewer than 30 highly qualified professionals—doctors, psychologists, engineers, physicists, etc. Lozanov believed that an interdisciplinary approach was necessary to properly understand the psi phenomena. There has been speculation as to whether Bulgarian Intelligence was also linked to the institute, and given the macro-political situation at the time it is more likely than not that this was the case.</p>
<p class="indent">In his laboratory, Lozanov researched diverse types of extraordinary and anomalous phenomena, as for instance savantism (extreme abilities in areas such as calculation and memory) and twin telepathy. Lozanov claimed to have discovered that if a wave pattern is artificially induced in the brain of one twin, the same pattern has a tendency to spontaneously manifest itself in the brain of the other twin—even if that person is in a different location! This is in line with the results of the telepathy experiment of Professor Adrian Parker, which is presented in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>, and the experiments with distant mind-influencing described in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>. In particular, Lozanov took a strong interest in precognition—he dedicated over 20 years’ work to mapping every aspect of this quite mysterious phenomenon. Lozanov became so renowned for his ability in this field that the Russian Communist elite, spearheaded by no less than Secretary General Leonid Brezhnev, trooped into his laboratory and asked for (= demanded) predictions regarding their political careers!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h33"/>Baba Vanga—Lozanov’s Primary Medium</p>
<p class="noindent">Lozanov used a large number of volunteers as experimental subjects as he was of the same opinion as Ryzl, that paranormal capacities—‘our secret powers’—are part of our collective heritage as a species, and to some degree are shared by everybody. In addition, he examined 65 professional psychics. His primary subject was Vangelia Gushterova (1911–1996), usually referred to as Baba (grandmother) Vanga, a medium of great repute, who during her lifetime received tens of thousands of visitors from many countries. Around 1960, a government committee that tested her was so impressed that their report declared: ‘We have to do more research on this phenomenon, we have no choice.’ Lozanov was given the task, and Baba Vanga was given a state salary (possibly identified in the salary structure as ‘tenured psychic’).</p>
<p class="indent">Baba Vanga also practiced healing, based on a combination of medical clairvoyance and herbs. Over the years, she became established as a Bulgarian national icon, and even though she did not profess any religion, a kind of spiritualist church was built in her honor after she died.</p>
<p class="indent">As a young and unknown doctor, Lozanov had become curious about Baba Vanga and, together with a university friend, paid her a visit one day. When his friend came into her presence, Baba Vanga told him straight away—without any prior introduction whatsoever—his name, where he was born, and gave a description of the apartment in which he lived. She proceeded to name his mother and described an illness she had, and afterwards she told him when his father had died, including the cause of death. She then observed: ‘You have been married for seven years, but you have no children.’ But this, she said, would change in the coming year. And, according to Lozanov, so it came to be that within a year the couple had their first child!</p>
<p class="indent">Following this impressive introduction, Lozanov himself was next in line. Baba Vanga started by addressing him by his first name (this happened many years before he became famous), and then she said: ‘You are a doctor, and heal people with the help of hypnosis. You have come here to test me,’ something Lozanov confirmed. All of this sounds like the ingredients of a magazine story of the best/worst kind, but was in fact reported by one of the most renowned psychiatrists in Eastern Europe!</p>
<p class="indent">Lozanov estimates that there were several hundred people present (Baba Vanga’s house functioned as a place of pilgrimage) and further relates that he and his friend had deliberately avoided all conversation while waiting in line to enter—to prevent the possibility of hidden assistants picking up information. This was long before the existence of the internet, and Baba Vanga was at the time completely blind. So—from a normal perspective, it seems incomprehensible how she managed to acquire such detailed and specific information about two completely unknown men. However, if we assume the existence of a <i>Mental Internet</i> from which information can be downloaded, then…</p>
<p class="indent">And Baba Vanga has, in fact, explained that when she spoke with a person, she often could see a stream of pictures in her inner vision, containing all sorts of information about this particular person, almost as if she were viewing a movie. But she often had no control as to <i>what</i>—past, future or specific topics—this movie would show her.</p>
<p class="indent">Vanga would sometimes receive exact times for specific events. Lozanov has mentioned an incident involving an unsavory person—a guy who behaved rudely and visited her just for the hell of it. She told him: ‘You will be the victim of a serious accident on November 11 this year. You will be seriously injured but will survive.’ And, according to Lozanov, this is exactly what happened: On that very day of November 11 the man became involved in a traffic accident! Of course, one may wonder if perhaps he, by some sort of autosuggestion, unconsciously steered himself right into this crash, and thereby created a classic self-fulfilling prophecy.</p>
<p class="indent">But Baba Vanga also gave many predictions regarding circumstances over which the subjects involved had little or no control. Just before World War II, she moved to Petrich, the village in which she would live for the rest of her life. A few years after, Boris Gurov, one of the neighbors, asked her about the fate of his brother Nikola, who had mysteriously disappeared 20 years previously. No one had heard from him since. Vanga told Boris that Nikola was still alive, and that she could ‘see’ him clearly. He now lived in the Soviet Union, where he was a scientist, but at the moment he was a German prisoner of war. She went on to say that he would come back to Petrich that same spring, and that he would then be wearing a grey uniform and carrying two suitcases. Here it sounds as if she is describing something seen in a movie, just as she had explained. And sure enough, two months later, following an absence of no less than 20 years without any contact or sign of life, Nikola, the lost brother, came back to the village in that very manner!</p>
<p class="indent">Lozanov related that through the years he probably had several hundred conversations with Baba Vanga. And since their connection lasted for two decades, he had the opportunity to check many of her predictions (which, in contrast to what is sometimes claimed, focused on personal matters rather than world events). Lozanov says that even if some of the stories regarding her gifts are exaggerated—she had some bad days on the job in which her abilities barely functioned—he is of the opinion that she was correct in nearly 80 percent of her predictions! And again, the source of this startling number is the respected psychiatrist, Lozanov.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h34"/>Meeting with a Master</p>
<p class="noindent">In 2008 Lozanov visited Norway in connection with his teaching activities, and I had the privilege of meeting him for lunch at the Bristol Hotel in Oslo. I had long felt an urge to discuss these topics with a person who had really dug deeply into the matter. Among other things, I wanted to discuss the following: Is it really possible to predict future events accurately, sometimes many years in advance? And if such paranormal predictions do take place, how can one explain them? And of course I also wanted to ask him about Baba Vanga. Lozanov responded pleasantly and openly, but he seemed tired (he was then over 80 years old). And he also seemed to be a marked man (he explained the reason for this during our conversation, see below).</p>
<p class="indent">Lozanov was a respected scientist within the Eastern bloc countries and for a long time all was well and good: he enjoyed government support, free rein, etc. He even had his own weekly TV show. However, when he started receiving international attention and recognition during the early 1980s, things gradually became problematic. Lozanov told me that he had been held under house arrest by the authorities for nearly 10 years! He was only allowed to move between his home and the clinic in which he worked. This was combined with a ban on all contact with Westerners, even by phone. And the authorities went on to confiscate nearly all his research material—a devastating blow for a serious scientist. As a consequence Lozanov has published very little of his parapsychological research. As he exclaimed: ‘I cannot publish without documentation—I am a scientist!’</p>
<p class="indent">During lunch Lozanov confirmed the main outline of the stories of the exceptional abilities of Baba Vanga, including her accurate predictions. As we have heard, these predictions could impart both exact dates and precise circumstances (cause, location, etc.) surrounding specific events in the lives of individuals—a pregnancy, an accident, a homecoming from a war, etc. When I asked him how this could be possible, he simply answered: ‘The limitlessness of Mind!’ He enthusiastically elaborated on this, and stated that this assumption was the foundation for his research both within the paranormal and pedagogy. And further he believed that learning and developing both normal and paranormal abilities primarily had to do with the steady opening up to more of this limitlessness.</p>
<p class="indent">Hence, I got the clear impression that Lozanov did not reduce Consciousness to just an <i>epiphenomenon</i>, a secondary phenomenon, a mirror expression of the chemical activities within the brain. Rather, he seemed to regard the brain as an extremely well equipped office in which Consciousness works. I am therefore convinced that Lozanov’s idea of consciousness is fairly close to the one presented in this book: that Consciousness is not limited to the brain, but that it also has non-local and non-temporal dimensions, as we shall explore elsewhere, especially in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapters 6</a> and <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">8</a>. Based on this perspective, which is shared by many other parapsychologists, we can all be considered dormant savants, magicians—not stage magicians but the Merlin type—and Baba Vangas.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h35"/>A Chapter Closes—or Maybe Not?</p>
<p class="noindent">Following these deliberations regarding the lives and thoughts of Milan Ryzl and Giorgi Lozanov, the chapter on military mysticism is drawing to an end in this book, as it has already done in real life, where both Stargate and the corresponding activities in the Eastern bloc countries can be considered closed chapters. Can we ever be completely certain about this, though? From time to time there are rumors that Stargate is still secretly in operation! Some contend that the rapid phase-out in 1995 was a ‘managed bankruptcy,’ a pro forma arrangement, in which the CIA sought to salvage some of its secrets from the public domain. There are indications that the CIA stopped activities within Stargate and transferred employees to other projects three months <i>before</i> the report recommending closure was presented. If this is correct, it may not be farfetched to think that the CIA had prepared an official closure of Stargate—for who knows what reasons—far in advance. In which case the report was just a prop, a ‘good reason’ for closure made after the fact.</p>
<p class="indent">Well, regardless of what opinion one could have on this, I would imagine that the story of Stargate has shown, possibly to the surprise of many readers, that paranormal phenomena have played a relatively large political role, not only in the days of the ancient Greek oracles and Roman augurs, but also in our modern ‘rational’ times. And if one has an inclination for conspiracy theories, one can, of course, spend quite some time pondering what might be the content of the roughly 20,000–30,000 pages of Stargate documents that have <i>not</i> been released.</p>
</body>
</html>