<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h36"/>Chapter 3</h2>
<h2 class="ct2a">ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASTONISHMENTS AND PECULIAR PERSPECTIVES</h2>
<p class="bq"><i>Man also possesses a power by which he may see his friends and the circumstances by which they are surrounded, although such persons may be a thousand miles away from him at that time</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Paracelsus</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h37"/>On Safari in Outer and Inner Landscapes—Considerations Upon Embarking</p>
<p class="noindent">On the following safari we will learn about specific incidents that have occurred when people from our Western culture, out on diverse research missions, have met with Indigenous people. Apart from the entertainment value such tales of the strange and the bizarre may provide, the point is to show that from Greenland to Australia, from antiquity to modern times—in spite of all the cultural differences and the worlds and times apart—there appear some surprisingly similar reports about individuals who have the ability to see/perceive sites utterly far beyond the reach of physical sight. In fact, it was just this capability that Stargate sought to cultivate! Here is surely a treasure trove full of stories; even a little too full according to the flawed judgment of a friend of mine—a former friend, that is (just kidding!)—who I think got overwhelmed by some kind of paranormal ‘culture shock.’ Yes, it’s an encompassing journey, like the spiral dance of Life itself, full of twists and turns, but there is order in chaos for all these cases are closely linked together by their common theme. They thus constitute a lustrous necklace of paranormal Biwa pearls thread on a string of clairvoyance!</p>
<p class="indent">We will generously disregard the ‘order of discourse’—the often arbitrary and unnatural distinctions made between social anthropology, cultural anthropology, ethnography, ethnology, etc. Different countries have their own academic subdivisions, so if our envoys may reasonably be described as ‘anthropologists’ in the broad sense of the word, they are very welcome in this chapter. Our foremost intent is not to engage in snazzy theories and the splitting of hairs, but rather to embark on a good old-fashioned treasure hunt in the anthropological archives! Those with an interest in more theoretical elaborations could, for example, check out <i>Being Changed by Cross-Cultural Encounters: The Anthropology of Extraordinary Experience</i>, Young and Goulet (eds.), and <i>The Ashgate Research Companion to Paranormal Cultures</i>, Jenzen and Munt (eds.).</p>
<p class="indent">For practical reasons I shall by and large use the ‘etic’ perspective, an outsider perspective, which means I will apply Western categories about what is normal and paranormal, natural and supernatural, physical and spiritual, etc. These ideas may of course differ quite a bit from the ‘emic’ perspective, i.e. the notions held by the Indigenous people and their shamans. And talking of which, a <i>shaman</i> (the word originally comes from Siberia) is, as many readers will already know, a trance medium—a person who through his/her expertise in altered states of consciousness is able to liaise between the physical and the spiritual world, and thereby may bring about healing, and perform psychic counseling and other spiritual tasks. Shamanism is often regarded as the earliest form of religious practice, going back to at least 30,000 <small>BCE</small>.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h38"/>Anecdotes and the ‘Emperor’s Wrath’</p>
<p class="noindent">Trigger warning! Most of the ensuing stories don’t fit well with the prevalent ‘map of reality’; they may thus prompt slight confusion, ‘cognitive dissonance’ and eventually activate defense mechanisms. Perhaps it may seem naive to present them in such a candid way as I do. But since most of the stories originate from esteemed scholars—not from raconteurs and spinners of yarns—they deserve better than to be dismissed as ‘anecdotes.’ The word ‘anecdote’ will in scholarly circles often be uttered with a slightly derogatory tinge, and used more or less as synonymous with ‘unreliable’ i.e. non-verifiable evidence. Originally, though, it was a neutral term, simply meaning ‘unpublished’ (Greek: <i>an-ek-dotos</i> = un-out-given). And, as we know, there may be many reasons for a book not to get published—some good, some more questionable.</p>
<p class="indent">A classic example of the latter is <i>The Secret History</i> by the Roman historian Procopius (c. 500–c. 554 <small>CE</small>), which was not published for fear of the wrath of the Emperor Justinian, and which during the Middle Ages was referred to as ‘Anecdota.’ Procopius’ fears were most likely well founded, as the Emperor is portrayed as corrupt and tyrannical, while his consort, Empress Theodora, is exposed as celebrating her carnal desires <i>in extremis</i>, wallowing in a variety of sexual pleasures and to such an extent so as to make Casanova a model student in Sunday school. The work thus remained anecdotal—unpublished, that is to say—until 1623, partly because of these descriptions (the readers are in particular cautioned against his <a href="14_chapter09.xhtml">chapter 9</a>…).</p>
<p class="indent">The stories that we shall deal with are less rabid than those of Procopius, and since they actually are published, they are no longer anecdotes in the literal sense. And what is really wondrous is that when anecdotes become published they often are indistinguishable, or almost so, from anthropological data collected by interview… Fear of the ‘emperor’s wrath’—thumbs down from colleagues, loss of promotion and financial funding, ridicule and ostracism—made, in fact, many researchers hesitate to publish their paranormal stories. And according to people familiar with the field, there are still those who hesitate, muzzling themselves lest the ‘emperor’s wrath’ be incurred…</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h39"/>Enigmatic Episodes—Different Districts, Common Kernel</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h40"/>Charles Darwin</p>
<p class="noindent">Charles Darwin (1809–1882), biologist, naturalist, geologist and father of our modern ideas about evolution, was also an anthropologist. This is evident both from the book <i>The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex</i> (1871) and from the rich and engaged cultural considerations about Indigenous people and colonists found in his travel diaries. Darwin recounts an episode that is of extra interest to us.</p>
<p class="indent">Jemmy Button (named so because he had once been traded for a mother-of-pearl button!) was a member of the Yamana people from Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America. After a year’s stay in England, Jemmy was on board the HMS <i>Beagle</i>, sailing back to his homeland. One night, while asleep in his hammock, he had a dream in which he was approached by a man who whispered to him that his father had died. The next day Jemmy related this rather somber dream to a couple of friends, Bennett and Bynoe. One of them just laughed the whole thing off. Jemmy, however, took the dream’s ‘announcement’ deadly (so to speak) serious—and it would indeed prove to be correct. Captain FitzRoy writes in his journal: ‘He [Jemmy] fully believed that such was the case, and maintained his opinion up to the time of finding that his father had died,’ word of which reached them on their arrival in Tierra del Fuego. Captain FitzRoy comments further: ‘Poor Jemmy looked very grave and mysterious at the news, but showed no other symptom of sorrow. He reminded Bennett of the dream […].’ Darwin writes in his diary: ‘Jemmy heard that his father was dead; but as he had had a “dream in his head” to that effect, he seemed to expect it &amp; not much care about it.’</p>
<p class="indent">They did not learn much about the particulars concerning the sad incident, as discussing such matters was considered taboo among Jemmy’s people. So although the dream’s message indeed proved to be correct, we shall never know if it was delivered at the exact same time as the death of his father. Darwin apparently took the co-occurrence of the dream/death to be purely coincidental, but Jemmy was, as we have heard, of a completely different opinion. And <i>if</i> Jemmy was right, the incident could be described in ‘etic’ terminology—meaning outsider terminology—as <i>dream-telepathy</i>, a subject we shall explore in some depth in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>. (Jemmy himself would, of course, have expressed it differently.)</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h41"/>Peter Freuchen</p>
<p class="noindent">Danish explorer, anthropologist and author Peter Freuchen (1886–1957) had an unusually close relationship with both nature and Inuit (Eskimo) culture, and was also as tough as they come: he once killed a wolf with his bare hands! In Greenland Freuchen collaborated with Knud Rasmussen (1879–1933), whose maternal grandmother was Inuit, and whose scientific expeditions facilitated Greenland’s incorporation into the Danish ‘commonwealth’ in 1933. In his memoirs Freuchen relates that when Rasmussen traveled eastward on his second major survey in 1916–18, he himself remained in the camp on the West coast. One evening during a celebration, Inaluk, an elderly woman, suddenly got up and left the room. A few minutes later they heard singing outside, and when they went out to see what was going on they saw Inaluk standing in the moonlight, swaying in a state of trance. She was heard singing: ‘Those who went to the East side have returned. Those who went to the East side have returned.’ When Inaluk came out of the trance, Freuchen asked her if all was well with Rasmussen’s expedition. Inaluk answered that two people were dead, but that Rasmussen himself was among the survivors.</p>
<p class="indent">Freuchen kept an unintended vigil because of this upsetting scene. Then suddenly, in the middle of the night, a ravaged Rasmussen appeared in the doorway! After greetings and salutations Freuchen asked if everyone had survived, whereupon Rasmussen responded that two were dead: their good friend, Hendrik Olsen, was lost and had probably been eaten by wolves, and their ailing botanist, Thorild Wulff, had, at his own request, been left to a certain fate in the icy wilderness. Drama at the highest level! For us the challenge is, thank goodness, far more trivial, namely to understand how on earth (or on ice) Inaluk could have gained this information? Rasmussen’s expedition had been away for more than a year, and no one knew if, let alone <i>when</i>, they would eventually return. And of course, all specific information about their condition was completely unknown. If Freuchen’s representation is correct, then maybe psi could be the answer? That Inaluk intuitively sensed that something was going on, and then, going into the trance, she opened up to a ‘download’ with specific information from the psychic cloud, the Mental Internet?</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h42"/>Sven Hedin</p>
<p class="noindent">The Swedish explorer Sven Hedin (1865–1952) was an internationally known and admired scientist, and was even knighted for his scientific achievements. This was especially due to his contributions in geography and cartography, but also in archaeology and anthropology. Hedin led several expeditions to the interior of Asia, and early in the 20th century he charted large parts of Tibet. He recounts an occasion where he had rented the services of a caravan guide from an isolated nomadic tribe to help him through a <i>terra incognita</i>, a completely unknown territory. Unfortunately, the guide perished shortly after, and the expedition had to turn around. On their way back to the nomads they met the brother of the deceased, and before they had time to inform him he said he knew of the sad news. He also provided a detailed account of the death and the place where it had occurred. But how come, Hedin wanted to know, did he have all this knowledge? The man answered he had seen it all with his mind’s eye! So—if the nomad was not mad and Hedin’s account is to be trusted, this seems to be a classic case of clairvoyance, that is, in ‘etic’ terms; the man himself had of course used his own, ‘emic,’ words. Anyway, I guess Stargate would have hired this guy on the spot!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h43"/>Henri Trilles</p>
<p class="noindent">The French missionary and anthropologist Henri Trilles (1866–1949), author of among other books <i>Les Pygmées de la forêt équatoriale</i> (<i>Pygmies in the Equatorial Rainforest</i>), was doing much of his work in Gabon, then a French colony. He relates that an Indigenous man was able to present him with a precise description of his home in Paris. This occurred many decades before the mobile phone entered the world stage. But perhaps this wise person had the opportunity to tap information from a person close to Trilles, say a friend, a co-worker or an assistant? Not impossible… But, the man also announced that Trilles’ father had recently died (which was unknown to Trilles himself at the time) and described the illness from which he had suffered. A few weeks later Trilles was able to confirm this information through more normal channels. So—was it just pure coincidence, a lucky/unlucky guess? Or could it perhaps have been a striking example of clairvoyance? One begins to wonder…</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h44"/>Adolphus Peter Elkin</p>
<p class="noindent">A.P. Elkin (1891–1979) was a renowned—and controversial—expert on Australian Aboriginal culture, and for a period was president of the Australian Anthropological Association. In his book <i>Aboriginal Men of High Degree: Initiation and Sorcery in the World’s Oldest Tradition</i>, Elkin describes the so-called <i>karadji</i>, a type of traditional Australian shaman. Among the skills ascribed to the karadji is healing (and murder!) by the means of psychic powers. Furthermore they are said to be able to move at paranormal speed and to master what in etic (outsider) terminology would be called clairvoyance and telepathy. Another interesting feat of theirs is the ability to create ‘magical illusions’ in the minds of other people through telepathy.</p>
<p class="indent">The ability to project images in mysterious ways is also known in a number of places, e.g. Siberia and Norway, where it is sometimes called ‘synkverving,’ meaning ‘sight-twisting.’ The well-known psychic Marcello Haugen (1878–1967) from Lillehammer is known to have been a dab hand (or mind) at this. For example, when young he warded off an attack by a bunch of bigger boys by projecting the image of his father standing right by him. The mob reportedly split and ran off as though having seen a ghost! (Perhaps not so far from the truth…) And when working as a stoker he, just for fun (albeit insensitively), projected into the mind of the train driver the image of a man standing in the middle of the railway track, reportedly causing the driver to panic and hit the brakes. Whether Marcello was just a natural virtuoso in NLP (Neuro-Linguistic Programming), somewhat like the great entertainer and stage magician Derren Brown (check out Brown’s videos on YouTube), or if the projected images really were created by telepathy is not for me to decide.</p>
<p class="indent">But let’s now return to Australia and Professor Elkin: On his ‘walkabouts,’ visiting villages in the wilderness, he realized that people knew beforehand of both his (unannounced) coming and also the purpose of his visit. Moreover, Elkin learned that people in some enigmatic way seemed to be updated about noteworthy events—deaths, births, successful hunting, etc.—pertaining to family members living far away. Elkin is not dogmatic but he suggests that all this could be due to telepathic communication. He has also suggested that maybe the Aboriginals’ tranquil lifestyle was what enabled them to pick up ‘vibes’—subtle ESP signals—that more fast-paced city dwellers and suburbanites typically wouldn’t perceive.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h45"/>Stories from <b><i>Sami Ednan</i></b>—the Land of the Sami</p>
<p class="noindent">The Nordic Indigenous people, the <i>Sami</i> (formerly referred to as Lapps or Laplanders), living in the northern parts of Finland, Sweden and Norway, have long been regarded as being really savvy in such matters. In 1555, Olaus Magnus, the Swedish bishop, ethnographer and cartographer, described in his <i>Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus</i> (<i>History of the Nordic Peoples</i>) how the Sami have special abilities that enabled them to gather information about kith and kin residing far away.</p>
<p class="indent">The mystical/spiritual aspects of traditional Sami life and culture were eventually suppressed and this silencing was justified by both Christianity (‘paganism!’) and rationality (‘superstition!’). This didn’t mean, though, that the spiritual traditions were forgotten, but they went underground and were practiced in secret. However, the times they are a-changin’, and especially during the past 20 years the old traditions have seen new recognition. Ole Gunnar Ballo, former MP and head of the Institute of Forensic Medicine, has for many years practiced as a physician in northern Norway. And in 2009 he publicly stated that the old Sami tradition of <i>blodstemming</i>—stopping of bleeding by psychic means—actually works! (Without trying to <i>explain</i> the phenomenon as due to say placebo, telepathy, healing, and so on.) And Helga Pedersen, deputy head of the Labor Party, has stated that among her people (Pedersen has Sami background) it is customary to consult individuals with this kind of expertise. Today, the ancient spiritual traditions are sometimes combined with New Age philosophy, and syntheses of this sort—often referred to as ‘neo-shamanism’—are thriving.</p>
<p class="indent">Let’s now consider an interesting little cultural historical piece by the Norwegian priest and historian Peder Claussøn Friis (1545–1614). In <i>The Finns’</i> [i.e. Sami] <i>Beliefs and Religion</i>, released posthumously in 1632, he says that the Sami at will can ‘fly off and find out what’s going on elsewhere.’ The Sami then lies down and ‘gives his spirit away, and is as if he was dead, and is black and blue in the face, and such he lies in an hour or an hour and a half, because the place that he is off to visit, is far away, and when he wakes up again, he can say what is happening and what certain people do and have at hand in the place which he was asked to visit.’ Within Sami tradition it is assumed that a person has a ‘body soul’ and a ‘free soul,’ and it is this ‘free soul’ that one can send off to wherever one wants. Within Western esoteric tradition a similar phenomenon is very well known, and is called ‘astral projection’ (where consciousness is separated from the body).</p>
<p class="indent">Friis continues with a delightful description of a real-life demonstration that took place in Bergen in the house of Johan Delling, a <i>Hanseat</i>, meaning a merchant of German ancestry. A Sami visitor was asked to use his special abilities to ‘fly’ off to Germany there to suss out Delling’s family members and what they were up to. The Sami went into a trance in a quite dramatic way. At the start he ‘was sitting, raging, just as if he were drunk, and then he suddenly jumped up, ran around a few times, and fell down, and was lying in front of them, just as if he had been dead, and when he at last woke up again, he told them what the members of his family [i.e. Delling’s family in Germany] were up to and doing, and it was immediately recorded in the guestbook, and was later found to be true, what he had said thereof.’</p>
<p class="indent">Certainly not a bad performance by the Sami!—regardless of how it could be explained. Friis goes on to relate other stories that obviously must be based on plain superstition and/or misunderstandings. But the feat performed in the home of Johan Delling, which, as said earlier, would be called ‘astral projection’ in Western occultism, is reported from spiritual traditions over virtually the entire world. The phenomenon implies that consciousness may in some way be separated from the body, and—as is occasionally experienced by ‘astral travelers’—is able to whiz off and see and collect information from other places.</p>
<p class="indent">In more modern language the similar phenomenon is often referred to as an ‘out-of-body experience’; it is found to occur spontaneously under various conditions—occasionally when a person goes into cardiac arrest or is under anesthesia. After regaining consciousness some patients will describe how they—as if witnessing the scene from above—could see themselves lying on the operating table observing the surgical procedures, the medical team, their comings and goings, the movements of instruments, etc. Under the auspices of the British intensive care specialist, Dr Sam Parnia, there has, for some years, been a medical project called AWARE—with a number of hospitals in the UK, US and Austria participating—that aims at charting the transition between life and death. And one of the many things they wanted to find out was whether the ‘out-of-body’ phenomenon is just something that the brain is ‘making up,’ or if a displacement of consciousness really occurs. So far it seems that in most cases ‘out-of-the-body’ is not synonymous with ‘out-of-the-ordinary’—the experience of seeing oneself from outside (which most of us will have experienced during dreaming) does not necessarily indicate that the ‘soul’ has left the body. But there are, so it seems, a few exceptions. We’ll comment a little more on this exciting project in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">But now let’s return to the Sami to make a proper farewell! This we’ll do with a captivating tale found in the writings of Ernst Arbmann, Professor in Religious Studies at the University of Stockholm. Since the original version is rather long I will use an abridged version given by his successor in office, Professor Louise Bäckman, who herself has Sami background.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>A Lapp, Lördal by name, offered to prove his ‘magic art’ to the Archbishop of Uppsala who was visiting his home in Lapland. Lördal burnt some herbaceous plants, inhaled the smoke and seemed to ‘pass away.’ After an hour he woke up and told the Archbishop that his wife was working in the kitchen, and he gave a detailed and exact description of the room. As evidence of his ‘visit’ to Uppsala, he said that he had hidden the wife’s wedding ring in the coal box. The Archbishop’s wife confirmed his ‘visit’ in a letter later on and the ring was found in the coal box, as the man had said</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">So—was this just a cleverly staged bluff? Maybe Lördal knew someone in the bishop’s household—someone who had told him details about the kitchen, and in addition had agreed to stealing and hiding the ring? And then he could orchestrate his theatricals—the burning of herbs, inhaling, fainting, all just to prank the bishop. Or could the reported effects, inexplicable as they seem to be, really result from ‘magical arts’—abilities that in ‘etic’ terms from parapsychology would be called clairvoyance and telekinesis? Or could there even be a third option: that Lördal had ‘seen’ the ring in the coal box via clairvoyance (a quite frequently reported ability, as we know from Stargate). And then he used the opportunity to boast of having placed it there himself by telekinesis (a rarely reported ability)? It will of course be up to the reader to eventually form his/her own opinion about this.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h46"/>Three Anthropological P(s)ioneers</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h47"/>Clarence W. Weiant</p>
<p class="noindent">Some anthropological researchers have tried to convince the scientific community to include psi in its horizon of understanding. One of these ‘p(s)ioneers’ was the anthropologist and archaeologist Clarence W. Weiant (1897–1986), whom we got to know in <a href="06_chapter01.xhtml">chapter 1</a>, in connection with his exciting discoveries in Mexico. In his previously mentioned lecture about anthropology and parapsychology delivered to the American Anthropological Association, Weiant recalls a momentous experience he had with a medium in Puerto Rico:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>With two friends I sat one night on the porch of a woman medium and listened with astonishment, as this lady described in detail my home at Peekskill, NY, including references to the location of trees and shrubbery, the colors of blossoms, the arrangement of furniture and pictures, an enumeration of the members of my family and their approximate ages, and even the correct diagnosis of an ailment from which my mother-in-law was then suffering. She referred also to intimate details of my personal life. The circumstances were such that only clairvoyance could account for her knowledge</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">And as we have already heard in <a href="06_chapter01.xhtml">chapter 1</a>, Weiant felt these strange abilities were not only astonishing and amusing, but that they could also have far-reaching consequences for <i>science</i>: ‘If it should turn out that the believers [in psi] are right, there will certainly be exciting implications for anthropology.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h48"/>Margaret Mead</p>
<p class="noindent">Present at Weiant’s lecture was Margaret Mead (1901–1978), the acclaimed and very versatile anthropologist, known for her cross-cultural studies of gender roles. This, in turn, contributed to her becoming one of the important figures in the sexual revolution in the 1960s and 1970s. Mead was considered an authority, and Weiant was acutely nervous to have her in the room! But there was no need for nerves. After Weiant had finished, Mead made a remark to the attendees supporting the general outline of Weiant’s vision. She related that she herself had done some parapsychological research together with the renowned psychologist Gardner Murphy (who we will return to in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>). She also put forward the view that anthropologists would likely benefit from mingling with psychics to get an increased understanding of their brand of mental powers.</p>
<p class="indent">Elsewhere Mead has stated that she thinks both to ‘believe in’ and ‘not believe in’ psi to be derailments, because in both cases one disposes of an investigating and scientific attitude. Belief and disbelief belong in church! Mead became a driving force for scientific studies on the paranormal. She was a board member of the American Society for Psychical Research (ASPR), and in 1969 she helped the Parapsychological Association become a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h49"/>John Reed Swanton</p>
<p class="noindent">Another prominent anthropologist who a few years earlier had tried to open academia’s eyes to psi was John Reed Swanton (1873–1958). Swanton was a preeminent expert regarding the culture of North America’s Indigenous peoples. For a period he was president of the American Anthropological Association, and he had also been editor-in-chief of <i>The American Anthropologist</i>, the association’s foremost journal. Swanton was influenced by the philosophy of the mystic Emmanuel Swedenborg (see <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>), and this had contributed to his keen interest in and deep respect for native spirituality, that is rooted in, but not confined to, shamanism. His high regard for the spirituality of ‘the other’ was also cultivated by studying under the great Franz Boas, who taught the intrinsic value of cultural variation, and that cultures should always be met on their own terms (‘cultural relativism’) and not measured by alien (Western) standards of progression. Among the groups Swanton studied were Haida, Chinook, Dakota, Sioux, Tlingit, Creek, Chickasaw, and Choctaw. In addition he collected information about other, lesser-known groups such as the Biloxi and the Ofo.</p>
<p class="indent">After his long, distinguished and honorable career as an orthodox anthropologist, Swanton, to the astonishment of many of his colleagues, suddenly declared his belief in psi! This took place in 1948 in the form of a ‘confessional’ of 96 pages, called <i>Superstition—but whose?</i> His step had usually been light and his touch soft, but now Swanton revealed his polemical side, and he fiercely confronted the scientific community’s lack of willingness to take the paranormal into account. He distributed his pamphlet to a number of his colleagues, and in 1953 he also published an article called <i>A Letter to Anthropologists</i>, where he gives a short version of his stance, designed for a wider audience.</p>
<p class="indent">With respect to paranormal phenomena Swanton says: ‘The evidence is, in fact, abundant. It is merely being smothered by a widely spread will to disbelieve […].’ He urged that science should not function as just another set of dogmas that the ‘believers’ must accept so as not to be ‘condemned,’ as he phrases it. Hence Swanton thought all truly scientifically minded anthropologists ought to familiarize themselves with parapsychology.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>A significant revolution which concerns us all is taking place quietly but surely in a related branch of science [i.e. parapsychology]. It is not being met in an honest, truly scientific manner. Adhesion to current orthodoxy is always more profitable than dissent but the future belongs to dissenters. Prejudice and cowardice in the presence of status quo are the twin enemies of progress at all times and especially of the ‘dispassionate method’ in which science consists</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Thus spoke John Reed Swanton! The loud and clear voice of this towering figure in American anthropology could not be misunderstood. But not much response came from his colleagues. Out of respect for his brilliant career his initiative was not opposed, but because of convention and tribal ritualism (‘how things are done among us’) it was not approved. Rather—to paraphrase St Matthew—his colleagues ‘made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise.’ Though in private Swanton received some declarations of earnest interest. And so it came to pass that Swanton’s initiative was mostly bypassed in silence. The anthropological community didn’t react so very differently from the three wise monkeys: ‘Hear no paranormal, see no paranormal, speak no paranormal!’</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h50"/>Zombie Time!—Joseph K. and the Coffin</p>
<p class="noindent">But lo! soon there was to appear an anthropologist whose paranormal ideas would gain at least <i>some</i> traction within anthropology, namely Joseph K. Long (1937–1999). As some readers may recall, the famous, unnerving novel <i>The Trial</i> by Franz Kafka opens with the following sentence: ‘Someone must have been telling lies about Josef K., for one fine morning he was arrested, though he had done nothing wrong.’ If we should dare to rephrase Kafka with respect to <i>our</i> man it might read: ‘Some scholarly tradition must have been telling lies about the paranormal, for one beautiful day Joseph K. was captured by surprise, though he had done nothing wrong.’ What took hold of Long’s thought process was the following: In 1970 Long was in Jamaica, comparing conventional physicians with local healers to obtain material for his doctoral thesis in medical anthropology. In the town of Mandeville the market square was buzzing with life (Long himself was situated some distance away) when ‘The Coffin’ suddenly came rolling into the arena. We’ll let Joseph K. tell the story:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>It was the height of market day and both shops and street vendors had a lively trade going when the thing appeared. It was a three-wheeled open coffin apparently steering itself into the midst of the crowd. There were three live vultures perched at one end and a dead arm hung limply over the side. As if that weren’t enough, a hollow voice issued from the coffin’s interior repeatedly inquiring the location of one Jim Brown. Hundreds of people saw it—and heard the voice</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Long arrived at the scene shortly thereafter and immediately interviewed a number of those present:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>It was incredible. There were literally hundreds of people in that square and they all saw it, and heard the same words. More than that—and infinitely more important—they had all instantly reacted with behavior that showed they saw it. Within minutes the shops were empty, even of storekeepers. Everyone ran out to see the coffin and then just milled around, the way people do when they have seen something that has had a powerful effect on them</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Aside from minor differences in the spectators’ viewpoints, everyone told Long the same story. They also interrupted the story at the same point: ‘Apparently, it just drove itself down the street and around the corner. Nobody followed. You can understand why.’ At first Long thought that since people had had some time to chat before he interviewed them, it could maybe be one of those cases ‘in which one or two people have the hallucination and then the emotion of the moment somehow carries the others along.’ But he changed his mind when he learned that everyone had reacted spontaneously and left the stores <i>before</i> having talked together. It became clear to Long that ‘they truly believed it had actually happened—self-steering coffin, vultures, hollow voice and all.’</p>
<p class="indent">But how was it possible that a non-existing ‘something’ could so strongly affect hundreds of people? Long had to admit, ‘I didn’t have a clue as to how to handle the matter. There was nothing in my anthropological training to prepare me for that coffin, and, had I seen it myself, I should doubtlessly have had myself committed.’ He therefore didn’t speak to his colleagues about what had happened that day: ‘What was there to say?’ But he never forgot it, and the event inevitably drew his gaze toward new horizons: ‘To this day, I can’t explain it except to say there must have been some kind of unique mass telepathic hallucination. That’s pretty weak, I realize, but how else to explain that several hundred people are in agreement about an event that cannot occur?’</p>
<p class="indent">We cannot rule out that Long’s idea of a ‘collective telepathic hallucination’ may be correct; seemingly such phenomena have manifested themselves in different places in the world. The most spectacular case on European soil would be perhaps the so-called ‘Miracle of the Sun’ that occurred on October 13, 1917 outside the Portuguese village of Fatima. Here, between 30,000 and 100,000 people (estimates vary) purportedly experienced the sun change colors in a most dramatic fashion while zigzagging across the sky. Many of those present described it as the sun ‘dancing.’ There are stacks of testimonies on record; a university professor in the natural sciences who witnessed the spectacle recounts the following:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>This was not the sparkling of a heavenly body, for it spun round on itself in a mad whirl, when suddenly a clamor was heard from all the people. The sun, whirling, seemed to loosen itself from the firmament and advance threateningly upon the earth as if to crush us with its huge fiery weight. The sensation during those moments was terrible</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Such celestial drama does not seem to be readily explicable by visual problems or the like. Initially, before the visions of the sun began, there had been sightings of the Virgin Mary, ‘a woman more luminous than the sun.’ This element of religious symbolism seems to indicate that what we have here is something other than just a normal meteorological phenomenon. So unless we apply a religious explanation, taking the incident to be a divine miracle, perhaps it could be seen as a most dazzling—in every sense of the word—example of just such a ‘collective telepathic hallucination’ as Long talked about.</p>
<p class="indent">Concerning the likelihood of collective hallucinations, Long had a paranormal peer in C.G. Jung, the psychoanalyst, who thought that these might occur when there is great turbulence in ‘the collective unconscious.’ This, Jung believes, will typically happen during traumatic events touching large numbers of people, e.g. natural disasters and war. So—perhaps it was no coincidence, then, that the Miracle of the Sun occurred in 1917, at the apex of World War I?</p>
<p class="indent">Well, anyway, after a long-lasting mulling over of ‘The Coffin,’ Joseph K. Long reached a conclusion congruent with that of Weiant, Mead and Swanton, namely that anthropologists ought to upgrade their understanding of parapsychology and altered states of consciousness. Long feared that without such understanding there may easily be ‘cognitive dissonance’ when anthropologists experience something out of the normal—something <i>para-normal</i>. The discomfort of having one’s mental world slightly tilted out of orbit may lead to denial and the underreporting of ‘disturbing’ incidents. Long was himself no stranger to this problem:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Going over my field notes convinced me that I had witnessed a number of examples of psi phenomena, but instead of recognizing them for what they really were, I rejected that explanation because it did not fit into the model of scientific anthropology I had been taught</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">In his book <i>Extrasensory Ecology: Parapsychology and Anthropology</i> (1977) Long discusses the problem of ‘cognitive dissonance’ and other issues pertaining to this scientific no-man’s land. The book also lists examples of experiences of psi reported by anthropologists. Long estimates that as of 1977 there were about a hundred reliable reports on record! Along with Stephan Schwartz and John Norman Emerson, both of whom we became acquainted with in <a href="06_chapter01.xhtml">chapter 1</a>, Joseph K. became involved in a lengthy and complex process (hmm, that sounded strangely familiar…) which in the end crystallized into the Society for the Anthropology of Consciousness (SAC). Long and Schwartz were the initiators and Emerson joined in to lend SAC professional gravitas. In 1989 Schwartz, then president, successfully set up SAC to become a division within the American Anthropological Association.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h51"/>Anthropology, Trance, Psi, Reason, and Stuff—Historical Perspectives</p>
<p class="noindent">Around the middle of the 18th century the French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau launched his soon-to-become influential notions of ‘the noble savage,’ which led to an extensive romanticizing of Indigenous people. These native peoples were said to possess all the virtues that we in the West lack: compassionate ethics, spontaneity, wisdom, a shame-free sex life, etc. And if upon closer inspection they did <i>not</i> prove to have all these virtues, it was more than once claimed that this was because their original culture had somehow been corrupted by Westerners. In reality, things are—as they usually are—far more complex and nuanced. For example, human sacrifice flourished among the Maya, Inca and Aztecs long before any violent Spaniard had set his conquering foot in South America. But <i>without</i> romanticizing it can be said that Indigenous cultures are generally far more open to altered states of consciousness and psi than our own society. Many groups have highly developed practices for shifting the gears of consciousness: drumming, meditation, ritual suggestion, dancing, singing, storytelling, psychedelics, etc. There will often be a Master of Ceremonies—a shaman, a noaidi, an angakok, a karadji—who is an expert in such techniques, and in the capacity of being a ‘traveler between worlds’ is familiar with the different mental landscapes, their dangers and opportunities, and therefore will be able to act as a guide. While our own priests and psychologists, people who according to their profession perhaps ought to be familiar with the depths of the soul, are seldom highly qualified in such matters.</p>
<p class="indent">The Western shutting down of these spheres is probably not, as some seem to think, due to our philosophical/ rational heritage from the ancient Greeks. Large parts of the population, including the philosophers—Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato and others—were not die-hard rationalists, but eagerly took part in the mystery religions. The Eleusinian mysteries in particular were popular, and some ethno-botanists believe that the <i>kykeon</i>, the holy brew drunk by the initiates, contained consciousness-expanding substances that—when imbibed during vigils in subterranean chambers and labyrinths—would easily arouse visions. And when celebrating the Dionysian mysteries, the point was certainly not to become ‘rational’—quite the opposite: the rituals were aimed at inducing altered states of consciousness, and by going into a trance instead of coming to one’s senses, one would sometimes open up to the sixth sense. An ancient text says that the initiates</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>threw their head back with glassy eyes, dancing to the beat of the drum, causing the blood to rush. In this ecstatic and enthusiastic state they indulged themselves, danced wildly and shouted Euoi! And at this moment of intense rapture they were united with God. They were filled with His Spirit and obtained divine powers</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">We’re obviously here talking about <i>psychic</i> powers rather than physical.</p>
<p class="indent">The ancient Greeks were in general quite open to what in ‘etic’ language would be called psi. The Delphic oracle is very well known. (And speaking of which, the Pythia, the High Priestess of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, did not just present her visitors with banal ‘oracle answers,’ as the modern, persistent myth would have us believe; many of her rulings were clear as crystal.) In addition we have reports of dozens of <i>mantis</i>, meaning ‘seers.’ Several of these are just fictional characters, but we also know of very real people of this type (psychics/clairvoyants) who were consulted by kings and coachmen, queens and courtesans. The ‘seers’ took part in people’s everyday affairs: business, marriage, moving, disputes between neighbors, etc. And Greek armies never fought a campaign without a competent seer in their ranks! Hence, within ancient Greek society skilled seers tended to have high status, high salaries, and often belonged to the societal elite. This, however, certainly did not mean that it was always hats (or hoplite helmets) off to the seers, for already in the <i>Iliad</i> and the <i>Odyssey</i>, they are, on occasion, denounced as too ambiguous, too unreliable or too gloomy.</p>
<p class="indent">Even when the Greeks gradually moved ‘from mythos to logos’ (from myth to philosophy), Plato still found a place for the seers in his ‘ideal state.’ And both Democritus (who coined the term ‘atom’) and Aristotle took certain forms of what we would call psi for granted, and tried to give philosophical explanations for the phenomena. Later, the <i>Stoics</i> held that the human soul contained an element that could be stimulated to develop precognition. Thus, together with the rationality they rightfully are so famous for, the ancient Greeks allowed plenty of space for phenomena we would call paranormal!</p>
<p class="indent">When the Romans eventually established dominance in the Mediterranean area, the mental space seems to have become somewhat narrower, expressed by shutting down some significant holy sites used for initiation into the Greek mysteries. However, this was by no means a regulation: as long as one worshiped the emperor’s genius and paid one’s taxes, the pragmatic Romans would often allow for participation in the mystery cults <i>ad libitum</i>. And as the alert reader of <i>Asterix</i> will have noticed, the Romans definitely took prophecy and foresight into account. They practiced, among other things, ‘reading’ the patterns in the liver of sacrificial animals and the patterns in the flights of birds. From a parapsychological point of view there will of course be no information in the patterns themselves—any possible information lies in the images that the seer projects into them. The same is also true for other divinatory means, such as cards, crystal balls, tea leaves, coffee grounds, yarrow stalks, charred bones, black mirrors, etc. They are canvases onto which our mental images—which perhaps contain elements of clairvoyance and precognition—may be projected. One might imagine that with tools as, say, tea leaves, yarrow stalks etc. the patterns formed could perhaps to some extent be influenced by psychokinesis. But when using crystal balls or black mirrors, it is obvious—since there are no patterns in the balls or mirrors—that all information (and misinformation…) stems from our own projected images.</p>
<p class="indent">Modern Europe has, as opposed to earlier times, quite rigid restrictions in relation to ecstasy, trance and psi—phenomena that are not identical but which often go together (we will delve more into the co-occurrence of these phenomena in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>). An important reason for this, perhaps even more important than Enlightenment philosophy and natural science, is the emergence of urban lifestyle; loud noise, hurried pace, rational organization, regulated working hours and all the other blessings of Protestant ethics that led to diverse ‘unproductive’ phenomena being declared <i>non grata</i>. It is therefore hardly a coincidence that it is within groups on the fringes of society, such as the Romani people, that we find the most vibrant cultures for utilizing paranormal abilities. As the saying goes: <i>Use it or lose it!</i></p>
<p class="indent">When a ‘reasonable’ person from a ‘sensible’ Western culture has to deal with African time, Balinese spirits or other ‘irrationalities,’ it may sometimes trigger a ‘culture shock’ to use the classic anthropological term. This is also true in the face of the Indigenous accounts of psi phenomena. Many early anthropologists who, stated or implied, adhered to the notion of white supremacy ‘solved’ this problem by interpreting stories about the paranormal as remnants and rudiments from an earlier stage of development—end of story! Later, genuine interest was shown in the symbolic aspects of these stories; an account of telepathy could for example be interpreted as ‘a close, reciprocal connection,’ or the like. But that the touching story—of, say, a woman suddenly feeling her child to be in need, rushing home just in time to save it from a wild animal, a fire or another danger—might also be about <i>real</i> telepathy; the direct transfer of information across distance, was more rarely considered. This could have challenged the fundamental assumptions of the Western worldview to an uncomfortable degree. Suddenly, before you know it, we would no longer be defining <i>their</i> reality, but they would be starting to define <i>ours</i>. Clearly, one should be careful not to allow for <i>that</i> much understanding!</p>
<p class="indent">Bronislaw Malinowski (1884–1942) is often considered the father of modern social anthropology. He advocated ‘participant observation’ as a norm for the discipline i.e. one ought to actively seek a duality—to be both inside and outside a culture, so as to achieve an understanding that neither mere participants (Indigenous people) nor mere observers (detached anthropologists) would be capable of. Malinowski had already promoted such ideas in the interwar period, but we had to reach the 1960s before anthropologists began to take part more systematically in rituals that included altered states of consciousness, induced by drumming, dancing, meditation, vigils, isolation, and entheogenic plants. Thus they came closer to a firsthand understanding of vital elements in the actual culture. Suddenly it became very clear that, for example, the shaman’s drum was much more than just a ‘culturally coded symbol of wisdom’ or something of that ilk. Such somewhat ‘geeky’ interpretations were frequent with ‘structuralist’ anthropologists who perceived a culture to be a ‘text,’ and thus tried to ‘read’ the culture’s beliefs, actions and objects in light of the latest (Western) literary theories.</p>
<p class="indent">Shamanistic ‘drum travel’ caused many an anthropologist to experience altered states of consciousness, and some also had psi experiences, such as astral projection, telepathy, clairvoyance, precognition and spirit manifestations—experiences that <i>can</i>, but probably don’t <i>have to</i> be attributed to hallucinations. Some of these ‘experienced’ anthropologists have become involved in the Society for the Anthropology of Consciousness, where our friend ‘Coffin Long’ was a prominent figure. While other researchers in this field—often called ‘transpersonal anthropology’—have chosen a more biological approach. One of them is Professor Charles Laughlin (b.1938), a Canadian anthropologist who has studied both African and Canadian ethnic groups with emphasis on rituals. He has also lived in Asia and for years meditated in the Tibetan Buddhist tradition. Laughlin combines field experiences with spiritual experiences and a bunch of different sciences to describe the interaction between brain, culture and consciousness. Regarding psi he notes that there is ‘evidence within quantum physics, parapsychology and ethnology from alternative states of consciousness—evidence that suggests that human consciousness is able to exert effects on distance and communicate using telepathy.’ Laughlin proposes that this may happen because the brain is a ‘quantum computer’ that can convert energy into information and information into energy (not easy, this one…). Although Laughlin believes that psi is real, he doesn’t believe consciousness to exist independently of the brain. Hence his view differs from, for example, <i>Irreducible Mind</i>, a model that will be presented in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h52"/>An Anthropologist Goes Native—Michael Harner</p>
<p class="noindent">It sometimes happens that an anthropologist becomes so engrossed in the culture of his/her study that it gets close to possession. This phenomenon is humorously referred to as ‘going native.’ The humor is, however, a tad sarcastic rather than friendly; to do such a thing is a no-no, and is seen as heralding goodbye to proper science, for ‘to go native is to go naive.’ And the poor anthropologist who has gone native will more often than not incur the ridicule of superiors, and encounter a loss of respect and grants, and sometimes even employment. However, there are honorable exceptions, who by virtue of their expertise continue to be taken seriously even after going native. One of these is Michael Harner (b.1929), who has taught at renowned universities, including Berkeley, Columbia and Yale. But Harner is also a practicing shaman! In particular, he is committed to spiritual healing, reportedly with far better results than those achieved by placebo.</p>
<p class="indent">During his studies in the early 1960s, Harner visited various tribes of Indigenous people living by the Amazon River and was there introduced to trance-inducing drumming as well as the consciousness-expanding brew <i>ayahuasca</i>. And as Harner succinctly says: ‘It worked!’ In addition to creating visions, ayahuasca reportedly sometimes facilitates telepathic contact with plants, animals, kinsmen and ancestral spirits. Because of such spectacular effects, one of the crucial components in this two-component concoction was, back in the day, given the highly descriptive name <i>telepathine!</i></p>
<p class="indent">Harner emphasizes, however, that one does not need psychoactive plants to experience altered states of consciousness; many shamanic traditions use only drumming or other auditory stimuli. He explains that the way this works on the technical level is by changing the brainwave pattern: shamanic drumming will typically have a base pulse in the theta range, i.e. about 4–7 beats per second. The frequency following response (FFR)—the response that makes us want to dance when listening to awesome music—causes the brain to adjust its pulsing to the drumming. Thereby it will start to produce more theta waves. Intense activity in the theta range is often associated with dreaming and creative processes and—based on research on shamans and long-term meditators—facilitates trance and perhaps even healing and other paranormal phenomena, so it seems. Harner was once connected to an apparatus designed to read brainwave patterns. After just a few minutes of drumming his brainwaves had markedly changed and he was ‘deeply into theta.’</p>
<p class="indent">Learning to change the brainwave pattern is an essential part of the technical repertoire in shamanism, but according to Harner there are many more insights to be learned from the shaman’s world—insights that could be of importance for Westerners. Harner emphasizes that although there are many versions of shamanism, there is also a surprising degree of similarity all over the world, a more or less transcultural essence, a ‘core shamanism.’</p>
<p class="indent">Belonging to this core is a profound understanding of the connectedness of human beings to the Whole, and the recognition that Nature can’t be bossed around according to human discretion and whim. This holistic consciousness is eminently expressed in the Oscar-nominated Sami movie <i>Pathfinder</i> (1987). In one scene, Raste, the <i>noaidi</i> (the Sami shaman), instructs the young protagonist, the pathfinder Aigin, on ‘the big picture’ and the connectedness of all things. Aigin, however, doesn’t really get it, and says he cannot see it. Raste then—with a dramatic gesture—places his hand tightly over Aigin’s face and for a few seconds prevents him from breathing. This very simple but profound ‘direct pointing’, worthy of a Zen master, gives Aigin an intense psychophysical experience of his continuous relationship with and dependence on Nature.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h53"/>Spirits—an Unknown Species</p>
<p class="noindent">In addition to the respect for Nature’s elements and beings, belonging to the ‘shamanic core’ also means having the utmost regard for a species that most Westerners rarely take into consideration, namely the <i>spirits</i>. Harner relates that through his shamanistic practice he eventually had experiences that forced him to reconsider his own worldview. His point of departure, which is shared by many—I would think most—anthropologists, was that ‘everything is culture.’ So, if during a trance you should meet with a spirit, this would usually be interpreted as your culturally coded beliefs structuring your experience. The spirit experience is seen as ‘subjectively valid’ (whatever that might mean), but I daresay there is only a small minority of anthropologists who would seriously consider the possibility that an <i>objectively</i> existing spirit had dropped by!</p>
<p class="indent">Fredrik Barth (1928–2016) was the doyen of Norwegian social anthropology who held professorships at both Boston and Harvard Universities. Barth belonged to the same generation as Harner, and decades before the mobile phone made its entry, he ran field studies among the Swat Pathan—an ethnic group in East Pakistan. On one of his trips he met with people from a particular clan, known to have a very close connection to their deceased ancestors (their ‘spirits’). They would provide remarkably detailed descriptions of what was going on in the village where Barth had his base camp, even if it was several days’ journey away. How they got all this information Barth said he simply could not understand. And then he added, tongue-in-cheek: ‘Well, I <i>hope</i> that I do not understand it!’</p>
<p class="indent">Harner was less hesitant than Barth to take the power of spirits into account and, as we just heard, he eventually became convinced that such intelligences, entities, or whatever one chooses to call them, are objectively real. Harner claims to be in contact with these nonphysical beings on a regular basis, e.g. when he is engaged in healing. He is certain that many encounters of this kind are not just ‘cultural’ or arbitrary products of the chemistry in the brain. Of course, different cultures create different versions of the Spirit World. And obviously brain chemistry is involved in the trance-experiences as in all experiences. But according to Harner, there is an objective spiritual reality behind the different mythologies and vast individual experiences. In the book <i>Cave and Cosmos</i> he writes:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Shamans differ from those who believe in spirits, because they know from firsthand experience that spirits exist. They see the spirits, touch them, hear them, smell them, and converse with them. […] You know your family, friends, and acquaintances exist because you talk and otherwise interact with them daily. Similarly, shamans know spirits exist because they interact with them daily […]</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Unlike Harner, most anthropologists do not recognize spirits, angels and the like as independent beings. Rather they would, in keeping with traditional academic psychology, exhort the spirits to be content with an existence as ‘sub-personalities’—parts of ourselves that under certain circumstances, e.g. in trance, can appear to have their own individuality. Sub-personalities are similar to the characters appearing in dreams. If I should happen to be dreaming of, say, a wise old man and a gorilla, a possible interpretation (for dreams are highly ambiguous) could be that they represent respectively my own wisdom and my own strength. But one would rarely conceive of this sage and gorilla enjoying an independent existence, and next morning to be strolling down some ghost town lane to get a coffee after a long night’s work!</p>
<p class="indent">Within <i>transpersonal psychology</i>—which we will discuss in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a>—one is often quite open to paranormal phenomena. Here sometimes spirits, angels and similar beings are seen as psychological ‘tools’ established by our psyche to manage our paranormal abilities. Such powers, to the extent they may be real, could obviously be problematic when it comes to taking responsibility. It is easier if one can say, ‘No, <i>I’m</i> not psychic—it is my late grandfather’s spirit who knows all these weird things!’ Or, ‘No, <i>I’m</i> not clairvoyant—it’s my guardian angel that performs the feat of viewing far-off places!’ etc. Things become a bit safer that way (and in addition one cannot be held accountable for possible mistakes…). And through rituals, trance, prayer and other techniques, one can conjure these characters—the grandfather’s spirit, the guardian angel, etc.—when one needs to activate their (= one’s own) secret powers of precognition, clairvoyance, and so on.</p>
<p class="indent">Harner eventually left the university system, not because he was unwelcome for, as already mentioned, he has taught at various prestigious educational institutions. However, he preferred to pursue his shamanic interests in a more practical way; shamanism is not primarily a theoretical thing. So to ‘beat the drum’ for shamanism in the most literal sense possible Harner now gives courses in drum traveling, healing and other shamanistic skills. He has also formed the Foundation for Shamanic Studies, an organization working for the preservation of traditional shamanistic traditions still to be found around the world. For those who would like to pursue this further, let me mention that interviews and lectures with Harner are available on YouTube.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h54"/>More About Spirits—Edith Turner, Eileen Garrett</p>
<p class="noindent">One of those who traveled with Harner on his ‘drum journeys’ was Edith Turner, colleague and spouse of the distinguished Scottish anthropologist Victor Turner. She was originally a conventional anthropologist, but she did eventually experience things that her university education had not prepared her for… In 1985 in Zambia, she was quite taken aback when a shaman during a healing ritual bent down while singing and drumming to extract a malicious spirit:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Suddenly Meru [the patient] raised her arm, stretched it in liberation, and I saw with my own eyes a giant thing emerging out of the flesh of her back. It was a large grey blob about six inches across, opaque and something between solid and smoke: I was amazed, delighted. I still laugh with glee at the realization of having seen it […]</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Apparently the patient became fit as a fiddle after this ritual. Turner deliberates:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Then I knew the Africans were right. There is spirit stuff. There is spirit affliction; it is not a matter of metaphor and symbol, or even psychology. And I began to see how anthropologists have perpetuated an endless series of put-downs about the many spirit events in which they participated—‘participated’ in a kindly pretense. They might have obtained valuable material, but they have been operating with the wrong paradigm, that of the positivists’ denial</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Interesting perspectives, indeed! However, it is well known that shamans often apply techniques to stage the perception of the illness leaving the sick, thereby activating a healing placebo effect. And initially Turner had been served a beverage:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>a cup was handed to me and I drank the liquid, which tasted pleasantly of fresh leaves. Immediately my head fired up and swam. The drink contained no alcohol, but I felt the same recognizably loosening effect as before. Nevertheless I went on writing my field notes with no change in legibility</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">The potion apparently didn’t induce any twist in her perception of reality, but even so, could Turner in the midst of tumult and drumming, her head ‘fired up,’ have been duped by shamanistic sleight-of-hand? Well, this we shall never know. But regardless of what might have caused her observation, she maintains she has seen on a number of occasions that trances, in addition to affecting the mood of the participants, also produce phenomena of the psi type:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I have taken note of the effects of trance and discovered for myself the three now obvious regularities: frequent, non-empirical cures; clairvoyance, which includes finding lost people or objects, divination, prediction, or forms of wisdom speaking; and satisfaction or joy—these three effects repeating, almost like a covenant</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">No big surprise, then, that over the years Turner’s professional interests took a markedly spiritual course. Among other thing she went on to conduct studies of healing and spirit manifestations with the Alaskan Native people (Inupiat), and she also portrayed her field experiences in several books.</p>
<p class="indent">Now, have Harner, Turner and countless likeminded researchers among spirit-familiar shamans gone completely astray on the vast plains of our inner worlds? Or <i>are</i> there really such beings as spirits? Maybe we ought to lend an ear to ‘the skeptical medium,’ as she called herself, Eileen Garrett (1893–1970). She was one of the most significant paragnosts (person with alleged paranormal abilities) in the 20th century. Garrett was in contact with spirits as often and as easily as with the pigeons in the park, and she was once asked if they really were independent beings (as the spirits themselves stubbornly claimed during her séances), or whether they were part of her own subconscious (as her Jungian analyst suggested). She quipped: ‘On Monday, Wednesday and Friday I think that they are actually what they claim to be… on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, I think they are multiple personality split-offs I have invented to make my work easier… on Sunday I try not to think about the problem.’</p>
<p class="indent">Apparently a wise and humorous lady, this Eileen Garrett! So in her spirit—a most apt metaphor when talking about Garrett—perhaps we should avoid drawing any categorical conclusions about Harner’s, Turner’s, Garrett’s, our ancestors’ and other people’s spirits—if they should be seen as independent beings, or if alternatively they should be understood as parts of our own subconscious? Or if perhaps these two approaches can be combined, in a somewhat similar way that one can see a human being both as an independent individual and also as an expression of our common human genetics. Both conceptions are equally valid, but from different perspectives. As always, it will be up to the reader to draw his/her conclusions.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h55"/>Modern Myths from Mexico: Carlos Castenada—Shaman or Sham-man</p>
<p class="noindent">When speaking of anthropology and the paranormal we cannot avoid mentioning the famous and infamous social anthropologist Carlos Castaneda (1925–1998). Castaneda, who was a doctoral student, and for a period also gave courses at UCLA, created a sensation in the 1960s and 1970s with his books about Don Juan Matus, a Mexican shaman from the Yaqui people. Castaneda tells of a vast amount of paranormal experiences such as telepathy, synchronicities, spontaneous movements through space, magical transformations, etc.—often in connection with altered states of consciousness. In his first two books such states are described as being induced by peyote cactus and Mexican ‘magic mushrooms,’ plants containing respectively <i>mescaline</i> and <i>psilocybin</i>, two powerful hallucinogenic substances. In the following books, however, when Carlos has ‘awakened’ from his limited frame of mind, and has come to realize that there is another reality behind the visible, Don Juan teaches him a sophisticated system of mental techniques, based on self-observation, meditation and physical exercises.</p>
<p class="indent">University professors lined up to bow in the dust to Castaneda, wowed by the young, brilliant anthropologist who took ‘participant observation’ to new heights, and thus obtained radically new insights into Yaqui culture. But as the Romans said: <i>Arx tarpeia Capitoli proxima</i>—the Tarpeian Rock (from which criminals were thrown to their death) is close to the Capitol—and Castaneda soon fell from academic favor. For even though his books about the things he and Don Juan experienced together are both entertaining and contain a lot of interesting psychology, it eventually became clear that Castaneda primarily had literary and philosophical ambitions, and that his accounts were not based on field studies with the Yaqui to any large degree, if at all…</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h56"/>Daskalos—the Cypriot Sage</p>
<p class="noindent">In his book <i>The Magus of Strovolos: The Extraordinary World of a Spiritual Healer</i>, Kyriacos Markides, professor of sociology at the University of Maine, describes a wealth of episodes that could have been taken straight out of the Bible: healings, mind reading, nature miracles, astral projection, psychokinesis and more! The person who is said to have been responsible for all these events was the mystic Stylianos Atteshlis (1912–1995). In Cyprus, where Atteshlis was a celebrity and had many admirers as well as many detractors, he was known as <i>Daskalos</i> (= teacher) because he ran seminars in spiritual development. His daughter has informed me that Daskalos had no fewer than two doctorates, one in theology and one in philosophy, as well as five masters’ degrees!—all from the University of St Andrews in Scotland. Some of Daskalos’ teaching videos are available on YouTube.</p>
<p class="indent">Professor Markides, who grew up in Cyprus, wanted to use ‘participant observation’—the central method in social anthropology—when meeting with Daskalos. He would not give up the role of observer, but at the same time he would be involved in Daskalos’ highly personal variant of Christian Gnosis, with strong elements from Asian traditions. The book portrays a series of meetings between the two, where Daskalos’ complex philosophy emerges through their dialogues. And in addition, as initially mentioned, we are witnessing a plethora of what we usually would call miracles. Daskalos didn’t think, however, that there was anything miraculous about these events. He spoke of them very casually, as ‘phenomena,’ and perceived them to be expressions of natural, but little known, forces: ‘If we knew how nature works, we would not call them miracles.’ Let’s have a look at such a ‘phenomenon.’ Markides recounts the experience of an Italian journalist:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>In front of several witnesses, Stylianos Atteshlis healed a three-year-old English boy of polio. I stared with curiosity at the English woman holding her child. Only when she placed the boy in Stylianos Atteshlis’ arms did I notice that [the boy’s] left leg was covered with a heavy plastic brace. It was atrophied and clearly shorter than the other leg… Stylianos Atteshlis sat on a chair with the child in his arms and began to speak to him with a very sweet tone in his voice. As he was doing that, he began to gently stroke the sickly leg. He pulled it a few times as if to make it longer… Ten, twenty minutes must have passed; I don’t remember. I had my eyes glued sometimes on the child and sometimes on Stylianos Atteshlis. Suddenly, the child made a pained grimace. At that point he raised the boy up, gave him a light slap on his buttocks, and said, ‘Now, run, my boy.’ And the child began running around the room. Was it a miracle! Was it suggestion! One can make whatever conclusions one wishes. I just describe what I saw</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">We obviously cannot decide what happened here, but will have to restrict ourselves to passing on the tale as one example of those stories that circulates <i>en masse</i> about this modern mystic. Daskalos’ obituary in <i>The Cyprus Weekly</i>, September 1–7, 1995 stated:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>There are many authenticated stories of the apparently miraculous cures that he achieved. One does not have to read Markides’ books to learn of them: Cyprus is full of people who, often as a last resort, had visited Atteshlis in the hope of being treated for ailments that conventional medicine was unable to help</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>There is no shortage of convinced and grateful patients, although equally one can find many people for whom the initial apparent cure turned out to be short lived</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Whether one ‘believes’ in Stylianos Atteshlis or not, it cannot be denied that he was a unique thinker and teacher with a ‘magical’ personality. His death will leave a far greater gap than most people in Cyprus could possibly realize</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><a id="h57"/>Bushmen—Pioneers in Web-Based Education</p>
<p class="noindent">When we’re speaking of ‘collective consciousness,’ we usually refer to what is agreed on within a group. Europeans, for instance, would mostly agree, say, that human rights form a valuable part of their tradition, that Beethoven was a great composer, that Americans for the most part are their good friends on the world scene (even though they elected Donald Trump…). Such perceptions, shared by many, are sometimes said to belong to the ‘collective consciousness,’ but there is of course nothing paranormal about this. However, some anthropologists report that certain Indigenous people know a qualitatively different form of collective consciousness—one that is founded on telepathy!</p>
<p class="indent">Professor Bradford Keeney (b. 1951) at the University of Louisiana is a renowned theoretician in cybernetics (systems theory) and psychology and has published about 30 books, including classics on group dynamics and counseling. But Keeney has also worked as an anthropologist with among others the San people of the Kalahari and the Ju/’hoan people in Namibia and Botswana. These are ethnic groups who are often referred to as ‘Bushmen.’ (The term has been debated, but most of the Bushmen themselves are apparently fine with it.) It is said that Keeney is the only Westerner to be initiated in their ancient spiritual tradition to the level of becoming a shaman, a <i>n/om-kxosi</i> (as to the pronunciation, I’m afraid I cannot help…). He portrays the Bushmen as having a far more direct, complex and nuanced kind of collective consciousness than a collective appreciation of fish and chips or a shared football roar.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>[In the strongest of such experiences] one’s consciousness will seem to slide or slip into another domain of being where one merges with the knowing of previous ancestors. In this domain of collective consciousness, sometimes called a ‘classroom’ by the Bushmen, you receive knowledge. It is visionary and is directly absorbed—like being downloaded. Here songs, dances, information about plants, beadwork, and all kinds of matters are passed on. This is why the Bushmen have no written or oral custodians. They enter into domains of collective consciousness and get downloaded through a heartfelt absorptive experience</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Keeney says that Bushmen do not depend on the usual types of transmission of knowledge, because their culture from days of old has used online teaching! These are indeed strong statements, but Keeney cannot easily be dismissed; in addition to being a highly respected psychologist, he has also headed the <i>N/om-Kxaosi Ethnographic Project</i>—a long-standing collaboration between the Texas Medical Center and the University of Witwatersrand (South Africa), to which both Megan Biesele and David William Lewis, two of the world’s foremost experts on Bushman culture, are affiliated.</p>
<p class="indent">Since there is no widely accepted explanatory model for telepathic communication of knowledge, researchers have often ignored the Bushmen’s stories of this kind, or have reinterpreted them as symbols of ‘a sense of closeness to the ancestors’ or the like. We shall not attempt to prove that the Bushmen’s telepathic experiences are objectively valid—we simply open up to the possibility that they <i>may</i> be so. I also note with pleasure that Keeney’s descriptions seem to fit surprisingly well with our own model. The Mental Internet really seems to be the epitome of a World Wide Web!</p>
<p class="indent">Some researchers have suggested that groups among Indigenous Australians have, or at least used to have, ‘classroom experiences’ when entering into ‘dreamtime’—the timeless sphere which we briefly mentioned earlier in this chapter. Bushman and Australian Aboriginal cultures are immensely old; in 2012 a set of Bushman tools was discovered dating back to 44,000 <small>BCE</small>! Perhaps this collective sphere, this ‘classroom,’ this ‘dreamtime’, may be the very basis of our human consciousness? And in that case, perhaps telepathy is our original means of communication? As we will see in the next chapter, Sigmund Freud thought that this is probably the case. He believed, however, that ordinary language is preferable. But we may not need to choose, for if there actually is a capability, a ‘language,’ which in a subtle way allows for direct communication between people, this could perhaps help strengthen the feeling that we, on a basic level, all are connected, and that we are part of something bigger. These insights form an intrinsic part of many primordial cultures, and we Westerners probably could benefit from becoming a little more aware of them as well.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h58"/>Back from the Expedition—Epilogue</p>
<p class="noindent">So—during this foray into some exotic paranormal forests we have seen that qualified anthropologists have had their eyebrows raised and their jaws dropped in encounters with primeval cultures more open than our own to the enigmatic world of psi phenomena. And even if the tales conveyed are not as luscious as Procopius’ stories (especially his <a href="14_chapter09.xhtml">chapter 9</a>, against which the reader has already been warned!), we have seen that it is by no means risk-free to ‘come out of the closet’ waving reports of phenomena that don’t fit well with a standard Western worldview. But truth should always take precedence over docile acceptance of tradition. Otherwise we will live in a perhaps pleasant, but still somewhat twisted version of reality, namely the ‘erality’ as modernist poet Jan Erik Vold humorously expressed it:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="poem"><b>-erality</b></p>
<p class="poemt"><i>you say, erality</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>is much eralier</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>than reality, don’t</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>you think? Yes, it’s probably</i></p>
<p class="poemt"><i>so, I answer, but</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>reality</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>is more real</i>,</p>
<p class="poemt"><i>still. You say: Of what help</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>is that</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>up against erality</i></p>
<p class="poem"><i>being as eraly as it is!</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">There are unquestionably many <i>eralities</i>—personal, religious and neo-religious—that we may lull ourselves into if we, for the sake of comfort, close our eyes to the realities. (And these days the political erality of Trump’s White House obviously tries to dethrone our known political reality.) Moreover, it seems there even may be some <i>professional</i> eralities around: diverse traditions, as for instance conventional psychology, medicine and biology, have made for themselves a quite transparent world, where a tacit assumption is that paranormal phenomena do not occur. Now, such a neat universe will undoubtedly represent many researchers’ beloved <i>erality</i>, but—does it also represent <i>reality</i>?</p>
<p class="indent">The long string of surprisingly similar stories from the different corners of the world rendered in this chapter suggests that there still might be vast unchartered terrains out there (and in there!), and that our everyday notion about human abilities and Space might be limited. This chapter has presented some perspectives provided by a number of nonconformist members of the anthropologist tribe, and the list could easily have been made longer. And now it will of course be up to the reader to find the answers that are valid for him or her!</p>
</body>
</html>