<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h59"/>Chapter 4</h2>
<h2 class="ct2">FROM THE HISTORY OF PSYCHOLOGY: IGNITING IDEAS AND PARANORMAL PONDERINGS</h2>
<p class="h3"><a id="h60"/>William James Throws Down the Gauntlet in America</p>
<p class="noindent">William James (1842–1910) started out as a physician, taught medicine/physiology at Harvard, but eventually opted for philosophy and psychology and is considered both a founding father of the branch of philosophy which is called ‘pragmatism,’ as well as one of the most important psychologists in history. Among James’ many contributions is his influential textbook <i>Principles of Psychology</i>, where he describes our consciousness as being a continuous flux; thus the well-known concept ‘stream of consciousness’ stems from James.</p>
<p class="indent">James, who was the brother of novelist Henry James and diarist Alice James, had grown up in an intellectually stimulating home, where his father had introduced him to much philosophy, in particular the ideas of the Swedish scientist and mystic Emmanuel Swedenborg (who we will have a closer look at in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>). These teachings gave James’ view on human beings a spiritualistic slant—the soul/consciousness is seen as something different from/more than the brain—a belief which proved to be lasting (even though he later, in keeping with his pragmatic philosophy, also included complementary perspectives).</p>
<p class="indent">Hence James did not limit his interests and activities to mainstream psychology but took a keen interest in the paranormal as well and eventually went on to become president of the ASPR, the American Society of Psychical Research. James’ study of the prominent medium Leonora Piper (1857–1950) led him to conclude that her trance states expanded her knowledge to a degree and in a way completely impossible to explain on the basis of existing science. James thus felt that scientists denying such phenomena were hindering the progression of science, a process that depends on being willing to let the outworn and outdated go.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>As a matter of fact, the trances I speak of have broken down for my own mind the limits of the admitted order of nature. Science, so far as science denies such exceptional occurrences, lies prostrate in the dust for me; and the most urgent intellectual need which I feel at present is that science be built up again in a form in which such things may have a positive place. Science, like life, feeds on its own decay. New facts burst old rules; then newly divined conceptions bind old and new together into a reconciling law</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">One of history’s greatest psychologists had thus thrown down the gauntlet claiming that that there are objectively real paranormal phenomena which merit—nay, demand—our attention, and which must be accounted for and integrated in our understanding of reality! Some decades later, in 1927, R.B. Rhine would pick up James’ gauntlet, and start doing trailblazing scientific parapsychological research at Duke University. However, the buzz of the day in American psychology at the beginning of the 20th century was ‘behaviorism’—stressing the measurement and conditioning of behavior—and within this school of psychology the elusive psychic phenomena were seen as irrelevant.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h61"/>Psychoanalytical Perspectives I—Sigmund Freud, the Secret Mud Bath</p>
<p class="noindent">In Europe, however, psychoanalysis—which attaches much more importance to subjective experience and our inner world than does behaviorism—was about to gain traction. This made it possible to consider ‘the depth of the soul’—complex emotions, thoughts, the unconscious, such stuff that behaviorism considers unimportant—as relevant in scholarly circles. Serious discussion, though, about the paranormal was all but easy, for in European universities, as in American colleges, fear of the ‘emperor’s wrath’—the fear of being punished by ostracism, loss of respect, funds and employment as explained at the beginning of the former chapter—was looming…</p>
<p class="indent">The most preeminent psychoanalyst by far is Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), and as most readers will probably already know, Freud was also the originator of psychoanalysis. But what is less well known is that Freud also took a keen interest in the occult. The textbooks in psychology will often cite Freud’s famous call to stave off ‘the black tide of mud of occultism.’ But one sentence quoted alone and out of context does by no means give us the true picture. For Freud was an honorary member of both the Society for Psychical Research (SPR) in England and its American counterpart the ASPR. And even if he may have begun as a skeptic he eventually became completely convinced of the reality of telepathy and wrote various pieces in the affirmative about it.</p>
<p class="indent">Freud believed he might have experienced telepathic contact with his fiancée, later wife, Martha, early in their relationship. He also did some experiments on telepathy together with her and their daughter, Anna, who became a renowned child psychologist. His belief in the reality of telepathy became firmly established in 1910 when Freud and Sándor Ferenczi, a Hungarian student and colleague, had an extensive correspondence on the subject. And on August 20, Freud wrote with enthusiasm that some exciting observations of Ferenczi’s ‘finally eradicates the doubt about the existence of telepathy.’</p>
<p class="indent">In public, however, Freud chose to keep silent. And the reason is, as we mentioned initially, fear of the ‘emperor’s wrath’! Psychoanalysis already had a whole slew of enemies, partly due to the fact that Freud and most of his colleagues were of Jewish descent. Anti-Semitism was rife in Vienna, and Freud had repeatedly been denied professional promotion and had felt the need to deny that his work was a ‘Jewish science.’ Another ground for friction was that psychoanalysis, through its pursuit of meaning in dreams and the irrational, was regarded by many to be unscientific ‘mysticism,’ and furthermore, a mysticism with a most contaminated content. Freud had argued that the child—the Victorian innocent, the pure and semi-divine child—houses sexual feelings toward the parent of the opposite sex, combined with a jealousy-based hatred of the parent of the same sex (the Oedipus complex). The late-Victorians and the Edwardians were not amused… And as if this was not enough, Freud had asserted that God, the Heavenly guarantor of morality and values, is nothing more than the image of a gruff or, at best, loving father projected onto the sky by infantile people. Should psychoanalysis on top of all this now also be seen as a mouthpiece for occultism? Freud thought no! And he therefore cautions Ferenczi: ‘Let us be completely silent about this.’</p>
<p class="indent">However, both Ferenczi and C.G. Jung—the Swiss analyst whom Freud considered to be his most important pupil, his ‘crown prince,’ and whom we will get to later in the chapter—had become really gung ho about exploring these exotic borderline areas of consciousness. But, in a letter of May 11, 1911 Freud seemed resigned to Ferenczi and Jung going it alone, ‘I see that I cannot hold you back. […] These are dangerous expeditions, and I’m not able to go with you.’ It was Jung, a natural born mystic, who eventually became the most ardent explorer of the paranormal primeval forests.</p>
<p class="indent">But as the years went by, Freud, in spite of his initial reservations, joined in for some minor excursions. In 1922 he published an article called ‘Dreams and Telepathy,’ where he says that it is ‘an undeniable fact that sleep creates favorable conditions for telepathy.’ (We will elaborate on this theme in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>, where we shall become familiar with some mind-boggling experiments in dream telepathy.)</p>
<p class="indent">Around the same time Freud also composed a somewhat longer lecture on the subject, probably with the intention of delivering it at a conference. But the ‘Committee,’ the inner circle of his associates, seemingly talked him out of it. The lecture, entitled ‘Psychoanalysis and Telepathy,’ was released posthumously. Here he argues that ‘There is little doubt that if attention is directed to occult phenomena the outcome will very soon be that the occurrence of a number of them will be confirmed; and it will probably be a very long time before an acceptable theory covering these new facts can be arrived at.’ These seem to be wise considerations.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h62"/>Psychoanalysis and Occultism—Brothers-in-Arms?</p>
<p class="noindent">Freud believed that in principle it should be possible to envision a fruitful interaction between psychoanalysts and occultists (Freud use the term ‘occultist’ more or less as synonymous with ‘spiritualist’); both groups are ‘fringe dwellers’ whose ideas about the depths of the human psyche are rejected by mainstream psychology. But such cooperation would hardly be a bed of roses. Most occultists, according to Freud, are too gullible and would probably right off the bat take paranormal phenomena to confirm their spiritualist worldview. But even if, say, telepathy should occur, this does not prove, of course, that there is a spirit world, with angels, etc. And although psychoanalysts are very open to finding meaning in dreams and the irrational, they are mostly diehard materialists—Freud thought that there was not even a theoretical possibility for a life after death!</p>
<p class="indent">Neither was Freud open to precognition or paranormal foresight—a phenomenon most occultists assume to be real. He discusses a couple of cases of <i>apparent</i> precognition, but concludes that it is telepathy that has been at work: that one person ‘tuned into’ the thoughts of another, and thus became able to perceive what was coming. If I get to know about Jack’s plan to buy a fishing rod and Jill’s plan to buy sneakers, there is certainly no precognition needed to predict that fishing rod and sneakers probably soon will be theirs. And whether I should learn of their plans via snooping in their shopping lists or via telepathy, in neither case is there a direct experience of the future, and therefore no true precognition.</p>
<p class="indent">In a quite candid lecture from the mid-1920s, published in 1933 under the title ‘Dreams and Occultism,’ Freud advocates the intriguing idea that telepathy, the direct transfer of thoughts and feelings, may in fact be the <i>Ursprache</i>, the original means of communication used by humanity before developing verbal languages!</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>One is led to the suspicion that this [telepathy] is the original, archaic method of communication between individuals and that in the course of phylogenetic evolution it has been replaced by the better method of giving information with the help of signals which are picked up by the sense organs [i.e. verbal language]</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Nevertheless, Freud believed that this ancient ability lies dormant; it is a discarded but not dismantled system of communication, and can therefore be reactivated e.g. by collective excitation: ‘But the older method (telepathy) might have persisted in the background and still be able to put itself into effect under certain conditions—for instance, in passionately excited mobs.’ The mass can then become almost like an swarm of angry bees or a flock of fleeing sheep, possessed and controlled by one, collective feeling, rushing off without any individual reflection, as is sometimes seen in political and religious rallies, war psychosis and even rock concerts and sporting events. If one accepts Freud’s premise—that telepathy is our human protolanguage—it seems reasonable, then, to assume that such mass hysteria could possibly facilitate collective telepathic hallucinations such as those we have discussed in connection with anthropology, that is Long’s coffin and the Miracle of the Sun.</p>
<p class="indent">There are, in fact, significant overlaps between psychoanalysis and anthropology, as both disciplines are hunting and gathering the meaning of symbols (psychoanalysis focuses on individuals while anthropology focuses on cultures) and both Freud and Jung have contributed to both fields. As opposed to Jung, who liked traveling to exotic places, Freud was more of a couch potato, sitting in his living room, puffing 20 of his beloved cigars a day (but as Freud reputedly said: Sometimes a cigar is just a cigar…). But even so, his thoughts, especially in the book <i>Totem and Taboo</i> (1913), which for a great part is based on anthropologists’ experiences, became important to anthropology. Freud claims there are striking parallels between the rituals of Indigenous people and the neuroses of Westerners, and he thus subtitled his book: <i>Resemblances Between the Psychic Lives of Savages and Neurotics</i>. Henceforth, anthropologists visiting the ‘savages’ would often have a well-worn copy of <i>Totem and Taboo</i> readily available in their haversacks. Freud and his ideas on telepathy such as the <i>Ursprache</i>, our original method of communication, are clearly indebted to the anthropologists’ depiction of phenomena occurring in tribal trance rituals.</p>
<p class="indent">But—fear of the ‘emperor’s wrath’ caused Freud to keep quiet about his paranormal ideas for a prolonged period of time. This silence most likely contributed to an academic taboo that perhaps could be termed <i>psi-phobia</i>: the fear of touching anything paranormal. This neurotic fear has in turn caused, and still causes, many accounts of paranormal experiences to remain anecdotal, that is to say unpublished.</p>
<p class="indent">So—the man who had once publicly warned about occultism’s ‘black tide of mud’ now privately enjoyed a veritable mud bath—soaking and steeping in the titillating occult phenomena. In a 1921 letter to Hereward Carrington, a psychic researcher and prolific author, Freud lays bare the depth of his fascination with the paranormal mud pit, confessing, ‘If I had to live my life over again, I should devote myself to psychical research, rather than psychoanalysis.’</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h63"/>Psychoanalytical Perspectives II—Carl Gustav Jung, the Abdicated Crown Prince</p>
<p class="noindent">The psychoanalyst who actually devoted large parts of both his professional and private life to the paranormal was C.G. Jung (1875–1961). In ‘alternative’ and New Age circles Jung has long been a grandee, and following the release of the movie <i>A Dangerous Method</i> (2011), his fan base has probably been extended to include other groups as well. This film primarily deals with relationships, conflicts and sexuality, but it also makes evident that Jung held paranormal phenomena to be very real.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h64"/>Breaking Free from Freud</p>
<p class="noindent">Jung had become Freud’s premier student and was, in Freud’s own words, the ‘crown prince’ of the psychoanalytic kingdom. But as happened on more than one occasion in Freud’s empire, the heir rebelled. An important bone of contention was the role of sexuality vs. the spiritual: Jung thought, as opposed to Freud, that neuroses are not necessarily explained by repressed sexuality and/or the accompanying family conflicts. He instead felt that the quest for Wholeness—the religious question, the yearning for Meaning—constituted a force even more essential than libido, i.e. sexual desire, especially with mature people. Freud was, however, no great believer in open dialogue; his pupils more often resembled disciples, and when anyone had the audacity to oppose him, there would be trouble… Jung recounts several of their disagreements in his autobiography <i>Memories, Dreams, Reflections</i> (1962), and the most interesting from our paranormal perspective took place in Vienna in 1909. Freud had then, because of ‘his materialistic prejudice,’ dismissed as nonsensical some of Jung’s questions concerning precognition and parapsychology.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>While Freud was going on in this way, I had a curious sensation. It was as if my diaphragm were made of iron and was becoming red-hot—a glowing vault. And at that moment there was such a loud report in the bookcase, which stood right next to us, that we both started up in alarm, fearing the thing was going to topple over on us. I said to Freud: ‘There is an example of a so-called catalytic exteriorisation phenomenon.’</i></p>
<p class="indent"><i>‘Oh come,’ he exclaimed. ‘That is sheer bosh.’</i></p>
<p class="indent"><i>‘It is not,’ I replied. ‘You are mistaken, Herr Professor. And to prove my point I now predict that there will be another loud report!’ Sure enough, no sooner had I said the words than the same detonation went off in the bookcase</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Jung, then, took this ‘catalytic exteriorisation phenomenon’ to be a physical manifestation of the emotional conflict between them. Freud also mulls over this episode in a later letter, and confesses that it made a strong impression on him, but without, in the end, agreeing with Jung’s interpretation.</p>
<p class="indent">After his final break with Freud, Jung underwent a painful period during which he gradually freed himself emotionally and intellectually from the yoke of his mentor. This liberation was facilitated by the psychiatrist Theodore Flournoy, whom Jung once referred to as ‘my highly respected and fatherly friend.’ Flournoy was a versatile scientist, who also made in-depth studies of spiritual matters. Jung says that Flournoy helped him to see Freud’s limitations, and also encouraged him in his research on religion and the paranormal.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h65"/>The Collective Aspect of the Psyche</p>
<p class="noindent">An important concept that Jung developed was ‘the collective unconscious.’ This, he assumes, is a ‘mental reservoir’ created by the experiences that humanity has accumulated throughout history. Jung once dreamed he entered a basement (a common symbol of the subconscious), and suddenly he discovered that under the floor of the basement there was an ancient cave (‘the collective unconscious’). This dream was one of the sources that eventually sparked off the idea that the psyche might have a collective aspect—a notion which, Jung felt, threw light on many phenomena, e.g. the development of the human psyche during the course of history, some otherwise apparently inexplicable mental problems, religious revelations and various paranormal phenomena.</p>
<p class="indent">Another source for Jung’s idea of ‘the collective unconscious’ was the observation that some people diagnosed with schizophrenia had visions closely resembling those depicted in ancient Gnostic and alchemical texts. These patients were people with little or no education, and Jung therefore thought it unlikely that they could have acquired their unusual imagery from ‘quaint and curious volumes of forgotten lore’ hardly known to anyone but a coterie of researchers. It then struck Jung that they might instead have obtained the information directly from the collective unconscious! In a memorable television interview for the BBC in 1959 (easily found on YouTube), Jung relates one such case, and the interviewer John Freeman asks: ‘And this you felt proved that there was an unconscious which was something more than personal?’ Jung answers with a warm and somewhat teasing smile: ‘Oh well, that was not a proof to me, but it was a hint, and I took the hint.’</p>
<p class="indent">To throw some light on the idea of the collective unconscious from another angle, let me mention that the well-known English healer Matthew Manning relates in his first book, <i>The Link: The Extraordinary Gifts of a Teenage Psychic</i>, that during his automatic writing sessions he had suddenly started to jot down words and phrases in Arabic and Greek—languages he had never learned! Manning’s publisher sent the Arabic messages to Professor Suheil Bushrui at the American University in Beirut, who informed him that they were written in Arabic script of different varieties and quality. Strange, indeed… But perhaps Manning could have picked up these letters and words unconsciously when reading books or watching TV? This seems to be a very reasonable idea, but could it also apply to those long sentences, with internal logic and correct syntax, which he sometimes produced? One message came in writing of such high quality that, according to Professor Bushrui, it seemed to have been written by a scholar skilled in calligraphy.</p>
<p class="indent">And what was <i>really</i> wondrous was that material ‘came through’ that contained information that was unavailable to the public. Over a period Manning ‘received’ a number of ‘letters’ pertaining to the internal affairs of the Orthodox Church—letters that seemed to have come from the hand of a deceased Greek bishop Nektarios (albeit these messages came in English). Some of the letters were addressed to the head of the Orthodox Church in London, Archbishop Athenagoras, and they were therefore passed on to their rightful recipient. After having read them Athenagoras stated: ‘The case of Matthew Manning is beyond any form of logical investigation. I can say positively that the young man has been in no position to know of certain things which were contained in those “letters.”’</p>
<p class="indent">So unless Manning and Archbishop Athenagoras here have joined forces to prank us—and Manning has no affiliation with any Christian church—this would seem to corroborate the Jungian idea that in addition to our individual psyche there exists a collective memory, where all our experiences, thoughts and feelings are stored. Or as we in this book describe it: that in addition to our computers, tablets, smart phones and our brains, there is a Mental Internet where our impressions and thoughts are uploaded, and where people with a ‘good search engine,’ i.e. those who are ‘psychic,’ can browse and download this information. Interestingly enough, Manning is not the only one who is said to have received messages in foreign languages in mysterious ways. The Cypriot mystic Daskalos, whom we got to know in the previous chapter, reportedly experienced multiple ‘downloads’ in ancient languages, conveyed by the spirit (or ‘spirit’) of a medieval monk.</p>
<p class="indent">But now back to Jung, who was becoming increasingly fascinated by this expanded perspective on the psyche. He therefore chose not just to let the ‘the black tide of mud’ run its own slow course, but rather he pried the floodgates wide open. And if we take Freud’s metaphor even one step further it would probably be apt to say that Jung excelled in occult mud wrestling: Over a period of 30 to 40 years he participated regularly in spiritualist séances, and researched at least eight different mediums. In addition to his own extensive paranormal experiences, as well as those he read in Gnostic and alchemical texts, Jung also received significant inspiration from the works of the English philosopher, poet and spiritualist Frederick Myers, with whom we will become acquainted in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">Jung—also for fear of the ‘emperor’s wrath’ (we’re getting used to this now…)—chose to keep silent about the paranormal aspects of his business. Hence outwardly Professor Jung remained a respected psychiatrist, a well-regarded guest at conferences and conventions. While inwardly, he was Basilides, an antique Gnostic teacher, who roamed around in the spiritual worlds, guided by Philemon, his guardian spirit, who revealed to him ‘ineffable secrets.’ Some of these revelations are described in Jung’s book <i>Seven Sermons to the Dead</i> (1916), which he chose to publish pseudonymously because of its special (to put it mildly) content.</p>
<p class="indent">But there is a time for everything: In <i>Memories, Dreams, Reflections</i>, Jung finally and unequivocally showed the flag and acknowledged a wealth of mysterious events, significant visions, telepathy and precognition. For example, he recounts having ‘seen’ Europe lying bathed in blood a year before World War I broke out. Jung also writes about various psychokinetic phenomena—a tree being cleaved from crown to root, a manifestation which Jung attributed to his family’s extensive spiritualistic activities; a bread knife exploding in the drawer; doors opening and closing by themselves (which Jung certainly did not believe was caused by a draft).</p>
<p class="indent">Equally quirky phenomena, which obviously are not easily verifiable, are known from many sources. Psychokinetic events are often reported in connection with <i>poltergeists</i> (German for ‘noisy ghost’)—a phenomenon which became part of urban folklore after the 1982 horror movie by the same name. The roughly 90 well-witnessed cases in Lalm kindergarten in 2010—objects flying around, things apparently coming out of thin air—which we will discuss in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a> seems to be an excellent example of poltergeists.</p>
<p class="indent">Also some of the actions traditionally ascribed to goblins, gnomes, kobolds, sprites, tomtes, etc. could quite reasonably be seen as the activities of poltergeists. But—take note!—in parapsychology, poltergeist activity is <i>not</i> seen as caused by goblins, gnomes or kindred creatures, but as spontaneous psychokinesis; that psychic powers in the human consciousness are manifesting physically. English geneticist and mathematician Dr George Owen, who was one of the world’s foremost experts on poltergeists, believed that such phenomena tend to manifest themselves around people with emotional conflicts—the events are not manifestations of an angry ghost, but rather of the ghost of anger. The loud reports in the bookcase that Freud and Jung experienced appear to fall neatly into place within Owen’s model. Both men experienced this to be a serious crisis in their relationship—a crisis with great emotional, symbolic and practical significance. Probably they both felt intensely something like: ‘Unless that [expletive!] shuts up right now there’s going to be an explosion!’ And that was also pretty much what happened…</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h66"/>The Archetypes and Synchronicity—Patterns, Coincidences, Themes and Meaning</p>
<p class="noindent">The collective unconscious is supposedly the habitat of essential patterns associated with particularly momentous human experiences and characteristics, such as birth, death, heroism, sexuality, aggression, wisdom, etc. Jung dubbed these patterns ‘archetypes.’ He developed his theories over a long period and his descriptions are not without ambiguities, but often he will portray the archetypes as ‘force fields’ of psychic energy. There have been attempts to modernize Jung, wanting to clean him of ‘occult mud,’ and thus some choose to interpret the archetypes more as ‘dispositions’ or the like. This author believes such rationalization to be a deviation, obscuring the <i>numinous</i> quality of the archetypes—their awe-inspiring presence and their possessing power—that was so often underscored by Jung.</p>
<p class="indent">Jung argued that ancient mythologies, with their plethora of Venuses and Marses, fertility goddesses and war gods, heroes and divine children, sages and witches, are galleries where archetypes are on display. Also modern mythologies, such as <i>Star Wars</i>, the Harry Potter books, <i>Lord of the Rings</i>, etc., are spheres where archetypes come to expression, e.g. characters such as Yoda, Voldemort and Gandalf are utterly archetypical—their presence can almost be felt, even if they are just fictional (or are they…?). It is the archetypes’ <i>numinosity</i> (their awe-inspiring spiritual quality) that gives these myths their allure and thus can explain why they exert such an attraction and cast their spell on us.</p>
<p class="indent">Based on the idea that all humans participate in the same collective field, Jung also dedicated much work to the mythologies of Indigenous cultures. By social anthropologists he is often dismissed as being ‘uniculturalist,’ i.e. without an eye for cultural differences, but according to the standards of his own day by which in all fairness he ought to be judged, Jung was probably an anthropologist as good as any: he went on excursions to Latin America, Africa and India where he engaged in ‘participant observation.’ Many readers probably have heard ‘The Rhythm of the Heat’ by Peter Gabriel; this hypnotizing track is based on a frightening trance experience that Jung had when participating in a drum ritual in Ethiopia.</p>
<p class="indent">Jung definitely had an interest in conventional parapsychology; he corresponded with, among others, the trailblazing parapsychologist Professor J.B. Rhine (discussed in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>). But Jung’s ultimate concern was not the peculiar phenomena in themselves, but rather the <i>meaning</i> they might create for the person experiencing them. Jung had observed that psi phenomena often manifested themselves when the archetypes, the psychic energy fields in the collective unconscious, are activated. This typically occurs in association with existential crises—when our quest for meaning completely fills us, and where we are driven beyond the limits of everyday life. People then tend to go ‘deep’ into themselves, into the subconscious, the ‘basement’ of the psyche. And, according to Jung, they sometimes go even deeper, into the sphere below the basement, to the collective unconscious. This may evoke and awaken the archetypes, which will often cause the occurrence of strange and meaningful coincidences, ‘synchronicities,’ as Jung called them. He mentions diverse examples from his therapeutic practice—let’s have a look at a classic case.</p>
<p class="indent">Jung had a patient who was struggling with a compulsively rational approach to life. She was an intellectual control freak, who had completely shut off the emotional/irrational, fruitful/chaotic aspects in Life—the precise aspects that, according to Jung’s understanding, could have helped to redeem her. To phrase it in the ‘archetypical’ language: She was much of an Athena, but very little of an Aphrodite. The therapy had stalled, and Jung did not know what to do. He yearned for something unexpected to occur, something that would cause her intellectual ‘glass cage’ to crack. And so it came to be.</p>
<p class="indent">One night the patient had a dream in which she was offered a valuable piece of jewelry, designed as a golden scarab—the sacred beetle that for the ancient Egyptians symbolized transformation and rebirth—that, symbolically speaking, is the very goal of Jungian therapy. As she recounts her dream to Jung, he suddenly hears a tapping on the window right behind him, and turning he sees a beetle ‘knocking’ on the glass. He opens the window and in flies a rose chafer, a golden beetle in the family <i>Scarabaeidae</i>, which is as close as you can get to an Egyptian scarab at more northern latitudes (check <i>Cetonia aurata</i>—it is quite beautiful!). Jung catches the beetle in the air and presents it to the patient with the words: ‘Here is your scarab!’ According to Jung this made a strong impression on her and helped her to open up to the irrational—exactly what was needed for her therapy to progress. Jung adds that he had never—neither before nor since—seen a rose chafer behave in such an intrusive way!</p>
<p class="indent">To describe this kind of event that, from his perspective, involved both the physical and the psychical, Jung introduced the term ‘synchronicity—‘same-timeness’; when coincidences are incidences coordinated. One definition of synchronicity is the ‘acausal relationship between two or more psychical and physical phenomena.’ The events in a synchronicity—in our example: the psychic (the woman’s dream about a scarab) and the physical (the beetle incident)—are, according to Jung, coordinated from a level beyond them both, namely from the collective unconscious. The psychic energy stored there, he argues, can manifest itself both psychically and physically. This is quite abstract, but we could perhaps use a thunderstorm as an illustration. Both thunder and lightning are expressions of electrical discharges; one expression comes in the form of sound (thunderclap), the other in the form of light (thunderbolt). But both are expressions of the exact same underlying level, namely the electrical discharges.</p>
<p class="indent">Jung formulated his idea of synchronicity based on inspiration from various physicists. He recalls that it was Albert Einstein, with his ideas about the relativity of space and time, who had first given him the idea that perhaps <i>causality</i>—the relationship between cause and effect—could be somewhat more relative than is usually thought. And by the way, in the early days when they were developing their respective philosophies, Jung and Einstein often synchronized their suppers by having dinner together!</p>
<p class="indent">In addition, Jung was influenced by the Danish physicist Niels Bohr, who assumes that reality is intrinsically paradoxical and therefore can best be described by models that both contradict and complement each other. In a similar way, Jung believed that his concept of synchronicity both contradicts and complements normal causality. Artists and creative people of different hues—those thinking a bit more ‘out of the box’ than most of us—quite often become fascinated by Jung’s notion of synchronicity. For example, many readers will certainly be aware that Sting, the great pop singer, released an album entitled <i>Synchronicity</i>. This is kudos to Jung. Sting also went into Jungian psychotherapy.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h67"/>Support from ‘The Conscience of Science’</p>
<p class="noindent">Perhaps quite a few of us feel that Jung, with his concept of synchronicity, stands in acute danger of finding patterns and meaning when there are none—a tendency often referred to as <i>pareidolia</i> or <i>apophenia</i> (this will be discussed in some depth in <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>), and thus that he deviates from a proper scientific approach. But, interestingly enough, Jung had strong and enduring support from one of the outstanding figures in modern physics, Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958), who received the Nobel Prize in 1945. Even Albert Einstein was an admirer of Pauli’s and is said to have thought of him as a kind of successor despite their significant theoretical disagreements.</p>
<p class="indent">Several preeminent physicists of the day sent their manuscripts to Pauli to have him propose improvements. But they did not do so without apprehension! Pauli did not beat about the bush; he was a merciless critic, too rigorous rather than too lenient. As he once said: ‘It may be that I have rejected something that was correct, but I have never accepted anything that was wrong!’ This severity had given Pauli the nickname ‘the conscience of science.’ On one occasion when a colleague presented Pauli with some calculations of inferior quality he received the devastating feedback: ‘This isn’t right. It isn’t even wrong.’ In other words: mere garbage.</p>
<p class="indent">Pauli believed, however, that Jung really was onto something with <i>his</i> theories. This was partly due to the fact that Pauli, as he saw it, had experienced many synchronicities in the form of psychokinesis. Typically Pauli would feel that ‘something’ built up inside of him, and a little later it would ‘blast’ a surrounding object. A chair, a vase, a motor, some electrical apparatus would suddenly break, crack, smash or snap. Laboratory equipment, which until then had functioned smoothly, repeatedly failed for unknown reasons when Pauli was around. This had occurred in several laboratories throughout Europe, and was jokingly referred to as ‘the Pauli effect.’ Some have tried to explain (away) the phenomenon, claiming that Pauli was abnormally clumsy, and that <i>this</i> was how the damage came about. Each is of course entitled to his/her opinion, but Pauli himself had quite another view; according to Pauli’s biographer and assistant, physicist Charles Enz, Pauli seemingly took the strange events to be expressions of his inner imbalance, a psychic chaos, manifesting psychokinetically as outward havoc.</p>
<p class="indent">Pauli would readily joke about the whole thing, but he also seems to have been deeply disturbed by it. Also other physicists were concerned about ‘the Pauli effect’: Otto Stern, who received the Nobel Prize in physics in 1943, was a good friend of Pauli’s. But even so, Stern forbade Pauli to visit his laboratory—for fear of his precious equipment being blasted by Pauli’s paranormal force!</p>
<p class="indent">Jung and Pauli stayed in contact for more than 25 years until Pauli’s death in 1958. They exchanged many letters, discussing diverse philosophical, scientific and paranormal issues. And in 1952 they co-published the book <i>The Interpretation of Nature and Psyche</i>, where synchronicity is the central theme. Both argue that the sharp distinction between Consciousness and Matter, which after the philosophy of René Descartes (1596–1650) became part of ‘the European (Cartesian) worldview,’ is primarily an expression of a limited perception of reality, and gives us a flawed concept of the world. Jung points to the alchemical concept of <i>unus mundus</i> (One World), which implies that there is a deeper order underlying everything, and hence the observer and the observed are two sides of the same coin, of the same underlying reality. This entanglement of mind and matter would, according to Jung, allow for the creation of synchronicities. And Pauli for his part concludes—very cautiously, after all he was ‘the conscience of science’—along similar lines: ‘It would be very satisfying if the physical and psychical could be considered to be complementary aspects of the same reality.’</p>
<p class="indent">In recent times others have spun further on Jung’s and Pauli’s ideas on synchronicity, weaving them into a broader cultural tapestry. One notable heir of theirs is the British physicist F. David Peat with his book <i>Synchronicity: The Bridge Between Matter and Mind</i> (1987) and <i>Synchronicity: The Marriage of Matter and Psyche</i> (2014). Other interesting voices can be heard in a collection of essays from 2008, namely <i>Synchronicity: Multiple Perspectives on Meaningful Coincidence</i>, Lance Storm (ed.).</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h68"/>Transpersonal Psychology</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h69"/>The Opening Toward ‘the More’</p>
<p class="noindent">Sometimes it happens that a person goes for a walk in the woods, and then suddenly starts to feel an almost mystical oneness with nature—an experience I am certain quite a few readers will be able to relate to. This could serve as an example of a <i>transpersonal</i> experience, an experience where one transcends (exceeds, goes beyond) one’s everyday perception of oneself. Transpersonal experiences may involve the paranormal but not necessarily; the essence in a transpersonal experience is to perceive oneself as part of something bigger. Such episodes may happen in nature, at concerts or religious services, being with a loved one, or being engrossed in an idea, solving a scientific problem, engaging in the struggle for freedom, etc. Some schools in psychology regard the transpersonal to be a fundamental aspect of being human, underscoring that deep inside us there will always be this longing for ‘the More,’ as William James once expressed it. And without taking this into account, a person will hardly be able to experience life as meaningful and fulfilling.</p>
<p class="indent">The danger if this existential longing goes astray is of course that the yearning for meaning, for ‘the bigger cause,’ may drag people into the murky morasses of blind nationalism, religious extremism, etc. Therefore a constructive ‘myth’ must be found. And if this myth is to be not just a delusion, a ‘life-lie’ as playwright Henrik Ibsen famously dubbed it, but rather a life-truth, the big questions must be dealt with. Within transpersonal psychology one does not shy away from this—quite the contrary: It is when a person becomes refocused from the limited (I-me-mine) to the transpersonal (us-we-our) that a transformation can happen—that the crack may become an opening for the light, that the wounded may become a healer. For example, Beethoven, Dostoevsky and Martin Luther King struggled with major personal problems (deafness, depression, addiction, gambling, suicidal thoughts, etc.) but dedication to their respective ‘More’ (Music, Insight, Ethics) made their <i>souls</i>—their innermost being and intention emerging from the collective Consciousness—come alive and thus they discovered treasures of value to us all. At least, this is one way to look at it. The great Argentinian writer Jorge Luis Borges has said that in our modern, secular day one ought perhaps not to use the word ‘soul’ but rather ‘subconscious.’ But he then added, tongue-in-cheek, ‘I prefer to have a soul!’</p>
<p class="indent">An early example of transpersonal psychology is <i>psychosynthesis</i>, which was developed by the Italian psychiatrist and student of Freud, Roberto Assagioli, and which to a large extent is built on esoteric traditions. <i>Analytical psychology</i> that stems from C.G. Jung is also a classic strand within the transpersonal family. Nowadays transpersonal thought will often be associated with figures such as Charles Tart, Stan Grof, Christina Grof, Ken Wilber, Ervin Laszlo, and a whole slew of thinkers and therapists from spiritual and humanistic traditions, e.g. psychodrama and Gestalt therapy. The most important ‘hatchery’ for transpersonal thought in the past 50 years has been Esalen in California, an impressively versatile therapy center, research center, conference center, think tank, art scene, etc. The exciting story about Esalen is eminently told by the comparative religious scholar Jeffrey Kripal in his erudite but readable and engaging book, <i>Esalen: America and the Religion of No Religion</i> (2007).</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h70"/>Stan Grof—Spirituality and Therapy</p>
<p class="noindent">One of the many exciting transpersonal therapists with a strong connection to Esalen is the colorful Czech-American psychiatrist Stan Grof, who first became known to the public through his work with psychotherapy and LSD back in the 1960s. (LSD was then a legal drug of which one had high expectations.) Grof began his career as a materialist with conventional perspectives on consciousness, but his own and his patients’ experiences gradually led him to radically change his views. An important part of this <i>Umwertung aller Werte</i>, the revaluation of all values, to use an expression from Nietzsche, was taking the collective aspects of consciousness into account. For the mature Grof, consciousness and spirituality are central concepts.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>We are not just highly evolved animals with biological computers embedded inside our skulls; we are also fields of consciousness without limits, transcending time, space, matter, and linear causality. And also: I had to open myself to the fact that the spiritual dimension is a key factor in the human psyche and in the universal scheme of things. I feel strongly that becoming aware of this dimension of our lives and cultivating it is an essential and desirable part of our existence; it might even be a critical factor for our survival on this planet</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Grof is in several respects a controversial thinker, but he has also received a lot of recognition; in 2007 he was granted the VISION-97 award, created by the legendary Czech dissident, philosopher, writer and later president, Václav Havel. In his speech at the ceremony Havel said the following:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I have always, all my life, thought that once something has happened, it cannot un-happen, that the entire history of the cosmos, of our solar system, of the Earth, and of humanity, are by some means recorded. That existence itself has some kind of memory</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">It is clear that Havel supports the idea of some sort of ‘mental cloud’ where all and every piece of information is stored. He further said:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>And the body of work of Professor Grof has all of a sudden shown me that, here and there, something is able to return, by a special pathway, from this memory, back to our time and place, into our consciousness. To our great surprise, we all of a sudden experience, identify with, or for a moment see something that happened many years ago, in remote places, and what we absolutely could not have previously known by any ordinary means. However, it is often possible to verify that it actually had happened</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Havel ended his speech as follows:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>This is by no means the only thing that professor Grof teaches and researches. Nevertheless, for me personally, this—let us say—almost metaphysical dimension of his teaching speaks to me and continues to captivate me. I keep thinking about it, fully convinced that I am not a madman, who just believes in a delusion</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">I now feel an urge to bow deeply and say: ‘Thank you, Václav, for strongly supporting an idea so important for this book!’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h71"/>Becoming Born Again…with Care</p>
<p class="noindent">As an extension of his transpersonal orientation Grof believes that our self-understanding ought to develop from <i>hylotropic</i>, meaning materialistic (<i>hyles</i> = matter, <i>tropic</i> = turning or changing) to <i>holotropic</i>, meaning holistic in an extended sense. One not only—not even primarily—needs to acquire new insights but must also open up to new experiences. Grof, as stated, started out using the powerful hallucinogenic LSD as a catalyst. Later, he and his wife, the late Christina Grof, developed breathing techniques, <i>holotropic breathwork</i>, to facilitate ‘rebirthing’—the experience of being ‘born again’ and getting a new sense of identity, a process described in a variety of myths since time immemorial. Grof comes across as an unusually robust person, and his therapeutic approach, which may involve unleashing torrents of emotions, can undoubtedly—as many have testified—have great transformative effects. Yet, such stirring up of emotions may, it seems, be a little too rough, even counterproductive, for some. So—even if there will be no big bad astral wolf to eat you, the results could still become unpleasant if using holotropic breathing to huff and puff and blow the doors of perception wide open without a good ‘set and setting’ (contructive mindset, harmonious environment, good friends, a skilled therapist), to use the famous expression coined by psychiatrist Norman Zinberg.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h72"/>Whispers on the Way</p>
<p class="noindent">Grof argues that when we start opening up to ‘the things in us that are greater than us’, psi phenomena tend to occur: precognitive dreams, telepathic experiences, and maybe first and foremost <i>synchronicities</i>—the kind of thematic meaningful coincidences we discussed in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a> in connection with C.G. Jung. In his book <i>When the Impossible Happens</i> Grof relates a synchronicity he heard from Joseph Campbell, the renowned mythologist whose works on ‘the hero’s journey’—a metaphor for the universal spiritual quest—was an important source of inspiration for George Lucas when he crafted the mythology for <i>Star Wars</i>. Campbell told Grof the following story.</p>
<p class="indent">Early in the 1980s Campbell was deeply engaged in an important project on the role of animals in shamanic imagination. In the myths of the Kalahari Bushmen, the praying mantis, the somewhat creepy ‘predatory grasshopper,’ plays an important part. Once, when Campbell was sitting in his apartment on the 14th floor of a highrise building in Greenwich Village, New York, intensely immersed in myths about the mantis—mind full, books open, pictures on the wall—he suddenly got an irresistible impulse to rise from his chair and open a window facing Sixth Avenue. This particular window was always closed. According to Campbell, in the 40 years he had been living in the apartment, he had opened it no more than two or three times. Campbell now felt he <i>had to</i> open this window and in doing so he immediately peered out to the right. And there—on the exterior wall—a huge mantis was ambling along! Campbell said he felt it looked at him with a ‘meaningful’ glance…</p>
<p class="indent">Finding a mantis on the outside of the 14th floor of a building in New York is not a quotidian event (they, in fact, can be found in some parks in the city but are poor fliers). Campbell was intensely focused on mantis mythologies and simultaneously felt an irresistible impulse to open this specific window that had only been opened every other decade. Moreover, this impulse occurred at the very moment the mantis strolled past. The statistical probabilities of this happening all at once seem, mildly put, to be low. So perhaps this could be seen as an epitome of synchronicity, when coincidences become coordinated?—a cluster of psychical and physical events thematically related, initiated by Campbell’s intense focus and nicely orchestrated by the subconscious.</p>
<p class="indent">Well, anyway, Grof concludes, justified or not, as follows: ‘Only a hardcore materialist committed to his or her worldview with a quasi-religious fervor could believe that something like this might have happened by pure chance.’</p>
<p class="indent">More than just a droll story about Campbell, Grof obviously also means this to be a story about <i>us</i>. For if we say yes to the ‘call’ and join ‘the hero’s journey,’ being urged on by ‘what in us that is greater than us,’ then, according to mythology, Jung, Campbell, Grof and others, these kinds of quirky coincidences (which the abovementioned thinkers believe are organized from deep within the psyche) will start to happen in <i>our</i> lives. We will in some sense become like the heroes and heroines in the fairytales who are helped and given hints along the way by talking animals and other magical beings, to eventually win the prince/princess, half the kingdom, or whatever symbol is used for the highest good. A pleasant thought that is!—and perhaps there may also be some truth to it?</p>
<p class="indent">In order to recognize and understand the eventual messages coming from ‘the King’s palace’ (the higher self, the depth of the soul)—to not ignore them, nor to neurotically over- or misinterpret them—one must according to age-old recipes learn to pay attention to one’s hunches, intuitions, dreams, feelings and forebodings. Or as a more modern expression goes: you have to listen to the vibes. From the transpersonal perspective such vibes, such intuitions, such whispers, may contain psi-based information beneficial to growth and evolution, personally and collectively. And perhaps this is, in fact, exactly where psi phenomena might prove to be more than just curiosities? That in this connection they, if we are fortunate, might show their real meaning, acting as communication with ‘what in us that is greater than us’? Perhaps <i>this</i> could be the most important secret of our secret powers?</p>
</body>
</html>