<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h73"/>Chapter 5</h2>
<h2 class="ct2">SCENES FROM A MARRIAGE—HISTORICAL GLIMPSES FROM THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OCCULTISM AND PARAPSYCHOLOGY</h2>
<p class="h3"><a id="h74"/>Introduction—the Paranormal Tango</p>
<p class="noindent">The period between 1500 and 1700 saw what is often called the Scientific Revolution, meaning that a breakthrough in natural science—mainly within astronomy, chemistry and physics but also in mathematics—took place. In addition, the ‘mechanistic worldview’ was introduced. Within this worldview the universe—including living organisms and heavenly bodies, which traditionally had been thought to be of a different, even spiritual, nature—is regarded somewhat like gears in a great mechanism, a cosmic machine, working according to laws that could be detected with rational methods. Thus the idea of <i>anima mundi</i>, the world soul—that the physical world ‘deep down’ had a spiritual essence, perhaps a personality even—was dispensed with; as the French philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650) dryly summed up the new worldview: ‘There is no spirit in sticks and stones.’</p>
<p class="indent">Within this new horizon of understanding astrology—where Venus, Mars and the other planets in the ancient world had been regarded as personalities, ‘gods’—developed into modern astronomy. And alchemy—where mercury, gold, silver and other elements were thought to possess spiritual qualities—developed into modern chemistry. The newborn sciences were based on the development of a whole slew of new ideas and methods, but there was also clear continuity—for example astronomy employed astrology’s detailed charts of stellar constellations, and chemistry utilized alchemy’s equipment and vast knowledge of reactions between elements. So in a certain sense the sciences became heirs to their respective occult predecessors.</p>
<p class="indent">But—as is the case with so many of shady backgrounds, modern science has proved to be sensitive to its ancestry, and many scientists felt the need to disassociate themselves from their parental ‘black arts,’ which they perceived to be backward and superstitious (e.g. astronomers deriding astrology’s horoscopes and chemists ridiculing alchemy’s transmutation of base metals into gold). The ‘old-timers’— astrologers, alchemists—for their part would often scoff at their heirs’ contemptuous attitude, their hubris. The new scientists seemed to think that they could just snap their fingers and demand the Universe’s innermost nature, its <i>quintessence</i>, to reveal itself in observatories or laboratories, complying with bureaucratic requirements and scientific protocols. So during their first symbiotic centuries the natural sciences and the occult arts often had a somewhat strained relationship—despite or <i>because of</i> their common interests—which in some sense resembled a <i>tango</i>: close and passionate but with an ever-present, underlying fight.</p>
<p class="indent">By the end of the 18th century, this tango—the love/hate dynamic between the occult and the scientific, the old and the new, the predecessors and the heirs—had manifested itself within early parapsychology. Those who had occultism as their <i>Weltanschauung</i>, their worldview, would typically be flattered by science’s keen interest in the phenomena, but at the same time might feel that the scientists’ approach of crude experiment and reason—rather than reverent invocation, meditation and ritual—was close to sacrilege. Rigorous scientists would maintain that no place, be it on Earth or in the Heavens, in the kingdom of man or the kingdom of spirits, ought to be protected from the scrutiny of human gaze and logic, and would regard the occultists’ misgivings as silly leftovers from days of yore. In this chapter we shall become acquainted with a handful of the actors that have played their part—some as occultists, others as scientists—in this paranormal <i>tango jalousie</i> during the past 200 years. The first scenes take place under the heavy crystal chandeliers in the Parisian salons of the late 18th century.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h75"/>French Opening Toward the Occult—Three Personalities in Paris</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h76"/>1. Magical Magnetism—Franz Anton Mesmer</p>
<p class="noindent">Eighteenth-century Paris was the most open and dynamic European capital in its time and thus became the center for innumerable revolutionary and spiritual movements—two kinds of currents which, incidentally, often seem to flow in parallel. One of Paris’ hottest names for a prolonged period of time was Franz Anton Mesmer (1734–1815). Mesmer was a German doctor who had built his practice on the notion of ‘animal magnetism.’ In Latin, ‘anima’ means soul, life, animal and living being. In the tractate <i>Propositions Concerning Animal Magnetism</i> (1779) Mesmer advances the existence of a kind of cosmic life force, a vital fluid, connecting ‘the heavenly bodies, the earth, and animated bodies.’ It seems fair to think of this proposed fluid as Mesmer’s version of <i>ether</i>, an omnipresent, subtle substance, traditionally thought to be the ‘stuff’ that space is filled with. Mesmer believed this fluid to be essential to health, and just as the blood circulates in the body a circulation of this ‘vital fluid’ also exists. If one was to heal illness, one had to remove blocks and recreate the flow of this fluid. Mesmer attempted to attain this by utilizing powerful magnets and verbal suggestions, combined with the laying on of hands—hence transmitting animal magnetism from the therapist to the patient.</p>
<p class="indent">The French matrons, who constituted the majority of Mesmer’s patients, were seated in groups of up to 20 in the <i>baquet</i>—a large, water-filled oak tub in which were installed magnetic iron rods which would magnetize the whole group at the same time. The treatments were often accompanied by pleasant fragrances and beautiful mood music; a miniature opera composed by no less than Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart had its premiere in Mesmer’s garden, with the composer himself, then aged 12, in attendance. The treatment employed by Mesmer and his pupils could trigger substantial emotional and physical reactions in the patients—‘crisis’ was the term often used—and various forms of trance states would frequently occur.</p>
<p class="indent">And as for the effects? There were many reports of ‘miraculous’ healings, and also of diverse experiences of telepathy and clairvoyance. Such effects were thought to be a part of the <i>animal magnetism</i>. Somewhat like ordinary magnetism that has the effect of attracting metal objects, animal magnetism was thought to have the effect of attracting mental objects—thoughts, feelings and information. Mesmer says:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Magnetism can be compared to a sixth sense. The senses are neither defined nor described. They are rather felt. One cannot explain to a blind man what colors are. One would necessitate him to be able to ‘feel,’ them, that is, to see them. The same holds true for magnetism. It must be mainly transmitted through inward feeling. It is only feeling that can make the theory of it understandable</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">In France a royal commission was appointed in 1784 to examine Mesmer’s claims. Among the commissioners were the inventor and US ambassador to France Benjamin Franklin (the guy with the lightning rod) and the physician J-I Guillotin (the guy with the guillotine). The study was not primarily conducted to determine whether Mesmer’s therapy had any effects—this was already proven beyond reasonable doubt by the many reported healings—but rather if Mesmer’s claimed discovery of a magnetic, vital fluid was correct. The committee concluded that such was not the case, and stated that the healings, if not ‘charlatanry,’ could be ascribed to the ‘imagination.’</p>
<p class="indent">This, then, must be said to be a modern conclusion, as it is now mostly assumed that what created mesmerism’s diverse effects was suggestion, and only suggestion. As with so many therapeutic techniques, imagination/suggestion/placebo probably was a highly significant factor in Mesmer’s treatments. But from the perspective of this book—that psi could, in fact, be real—we shouldn’t ignore the possibility that Mesmer may have been an accomplished healer, or, in the terms of mesmerism, a man charged with <i>animal magnetism</i> (this <i>is</i> an amusing expression!). We should also be open to the possibility that the telepathic and clairvoyant experiences so often reported could have been real. Trance states, which often occurred with Mesmer’s treatments, are known to be ‘psi-conductive,’ i.e. they facilitate the occurrence of psi phenomena. The reason is—as stated above—that such states, for both good and for bad, weaken the mental filters that organize our reality. In <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>, we’ll take a closer look at this connection.</p>
<p class="indent">Mesmer’s work aroused scientific interest in countries other than France. In 1812, King Frederick William III of Prussia appointed a commission to investigate the concept of ‘healing magnetism,’ and, in 1816, the use of this method was approved for medical purposes. In Berlin in 1817, Karl Christian Wolfart (1788–1832) was appointed professor of ‘pathology, therapy, mesmerism and magnetism.’ Some decades later, an English commission also got to work. In July 1870, following two years of investigation of 33 people who were each submitted to 50 sessions, the commission had not detected any of Mesmer’s vital fluid, but confirmed the occurrence of striking and strange effects, and thus encouraged further research on the subject.</p>
<p class="indent">Mesmer’s ‘miracles’ were eagerly discussed at the Parisian café tables, where absinthe’s ‘green fairy’ exercised its alluring enchantments over the patrons’ minds, and in the course of time Mesmer became a celebrity exerting influence over large parts of Europe. And even if Mesmer himself was not a particularly revolutionary person, his <i>concept of health</i>, emphasizing the creation of harmony via unrestrained flow, and that of healing occurring through crisis, became common stock in the rhetoric of many revolutionaries. To effect the healing of humanity, the unnatural rhythms, creating stagnation and disharmony in the body of society—such as the usurping of the poor by the rich—must be removed, and must be removed now!</p>
<p class="indent">Mesmer’s impact continues to this very day. The strange phenomena that so often occurred during the treatment sessions conducted by him and his successors gave a far-reaching, perhaps decisive, impulse to the incipient scientific research on hypnosis, trance and psi that took place during the 19th century. Whatever one may think about his theories, he is still to be considered a significant pioneer in hypnosis. And the most widely disseminated, if hidden-in-plain-sight, cultural resonance of Mesmer’s influence is our frequent use of a word that can mean <i>enchant, dazzle, spellbind</i> and <i>hypnotize</i>, namely—<i>mesmerize</i>.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h77"/>2. Indian Intermezzo—Abbé Faria</p>
<p class="noindent">In Alexandre Dumas’ famous novel <i>The Count of Monte Cristo</i>, as many readers and/or moviegoers will surely remember, there features a mysterious monk who is said to be mad; his name is Abbé Faria. In the Château d’If, a gruesome penitentiary on a small island in the Mediterranean where France used to deposit its ‘enemies of the state,’ Faria assumes the role of mentor for the innocently imprisoned Edmond Dantès, the future Count of Monte Cristo. Faria inaugurates Edmond in the deep secrets—of philosophy, physics and chemistry (and how to make poison…)—and also reveals where the vast treasure of Cardinal Spada is hidden, namely on the island of Monte Cristo off the coast of Tuscany.</p>
<p class="indent">But what many probably do not know is that the character of Abbé Faria, as well as the plot of this exciting book, is taken straight out of real life. José Custódio de Faria (1756–1819) originally came from Goa in India; he was a Catholic monk but also a revolutionary, and his involvement in politics got him into trouble with the French authorities. He served time as a political prisoner in the Bastille, and, at least according to one biographer, he may also have spent a period detained in the dreaded Château d’If.</p>
<p class="indent">Faria was an outstanding hypnotist—he was even consulted by Napoleon—and he had an unusually modern approach to hypnosis. Many of his contemporaries perceived hypnosis to be a subdivision within the occult range of activities, and therefore either tended to write off its effects altogether (superstitious humbug!) or to misinterpret them (extraordinarily mysterious!). The same attitudes also applied to the occurrences of clairvoyance and telepathy that were frequently reported. Faria, who had been a follower of Mesmer, believed that these phenomena were definitely real (he had experiences of the kind himself), but held that mysterious powers or <i>animal magnetism</i> à la Mesmer were not necessary to explain them. Rather, the key to the whole thing was to be found within the consciousness of the hypnotized, ‘the concentrated,’ as was the term used by Faria.</p>
<p class="indent">Even though he no longer believed in animal magnetism, Faria was in every respect a magnetic personality, and he used his charismatic appearance—his intense eyes, his tall, dark and lean figure, and his mysterious oriental background (he was entitled ‘Brahmin’ on his visiting card)—for everything that it was worth. And with the contemporary fascination with the oriental and the world of <i>One Thousand and One Nights</i>—where powerful Parisian salon hostesses, the <i>salonnières</i>, would receive their guests in Eastern fashion, sitting cross-legged on a heap of cushions, sporting a turban and smoking a hookah—Faria’s genuinely exotic image was an asset of no little value. The fascination with the Orient is also apparent in <i>The Count of Monte Cristo</i>, e.g. Haydée, the Count’s beautiful slave-to-become-lover, is from Albania in the Ottoman (Turkish) Empire, and the use of exotic drugs is portrayed. In the wake of Napoleon’s Egyptian campaign repatriated soldiers, having settled into oriental habits, stuffed their <i>narghiles</i> and <i>chibouks</i> and other Eastern smoking apparatus with more than just tobacco, and hashish would in the course of the following decades become fashionable in Paris. Dumas and his friends are known to have smoked <i>dawamesk</i>, a blend of hashish, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, pistachio, sugar, orange juice, butter and cantharides—some exotic tobacco, that is!</p>
<p class="indent">The Parisian ‘proto-hippies’ were, as goes with the trade, interested in everything exotic, in altered states of consciousness and in the occult. What, then, could be more chic than to be put into a hypnotic trance by a real Indian Brahmin! And Faria did not disappoint: daily he held sessions for approximately 60 people at a time. The gatherings were inundated with people, and during the course of his stay in Paris Faria seemingly hypnotized as many as 5,000 acolytes! Thus he followed suit with Mesmer, making altered states of consciousness, clairvoyance and related phenomena part of the buzz of the day. As we now know, altered states of consciousness—hypnotic trance, ecstasy, meditation, drug use, and other methods of breaking down the boundaries between subject and object—are ‘psi-conductive.’ The reason is that such states, for both good and for bad, weaken the mental filters that organize our reality.</p>
<p class="indent">With his countless therapeutic sessions and his books, Faria gave an impetus to the strong French tradition in hypnosis and suggestion, represented by outstanding figures such as J-M Charcot (pioneering neurologist and Sigmund Freud’s teacher in hypnosis), C.R. Richet (Nobel laureate, physiologist and parapsychologist) and Émile Coué (the grand old man of autosuggestion). Faria is even considered by some historians to be <i>the</i> founder of medical hypnosis. Thus he can be considered prominent in the history of both parapsychology and the development of self-improvement techniques using autosuggestion to effect changes in one’s body, mind and circumstances, such as autogenic training, positive thinking, creative visualization, NLP (Neuro-Linguistic Programming), etc.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h78"/>3. In the Sibyl’s Boudoir—Marie-Anne Lenormand</p>
<p class="noindent">For 40 years, Paris was the home of Europe’s most famous paranormal person, namely the hypnotist, clairvoyant, medium and fortune teller Marie-Anne Lenormand (1772–1843). Her list of clients was both long and wide and included some of the mighty leaders of the French Revolution, namely Robespierre, Saint-Just and Marat. And while all three were still riding high at the pinnacle of their power, she is said to have predicted a swift and brutal death for each of them, a prediction they allegedly received with laughter. But, within a year—July 1793–July 1794—Marat had been stabbed to death in his bathtub, whereas Robespierre and Saint-Just had lost their heads on the guillotine!</p>
<p class="indent">So how did Mlle Lenormand know? Did she just happen to have a superb flair for the murky maneuvers in the labyrinths of power? Did any of her clients provide her with sensitive information? Or are we talking here about <i>real</i> precognition, paranormal foresight based on psi? No one knows. But what we do know for certain is that she was a woman of courage, as she dared to throw such grim predictions right in the face of these powerful persons, and later she even challenged Napoleon Bonaparte, the Emperor. Regarding her abilities, she was not in doubt. She saw herself in a direct line of descent from the divinely inspired seers and oracles described in the <i>Iliad</i> and the <i>Odyssey</i>, who in ancient times had been consulted by kings and commoners, warlords and philosophers. In some of her books—the good lady was both an author and a publisher—she consequently referred to herself as ‘the Sibyl’ (i.e. the Oracle).</p>
<p class="indent">According to Alexandre Dumas, both Napoleon and Joséphine, later his consort, had visited the Sibyl’s boudoir in a fashionable apartment at 8 Rue de Tournon. In his book <i>The Whites and the Blues</i>, Dumas gives both a long and colorful depiction of these (separate) sessions, and in Dumas’ rendition both Napoleon and Joséphine received clear messages about the spectacular fates that awaited them. As she grabs Joséphine’s hand and falls to her knees, the Sibyl exclaims: ‘Madame, I do not know your name, I do not know your rank, but I know your future. Madame, remember me when you are—empress.’ While Napoleon a little later was told: ‘You’re going to be Alexander, you’re going to be Caesar, you’re going to be even more than that—you get to be Atlas who carries the world on your shoulders.’ Dumas claims his account is reliable because it is based on information he received directly from the Sibyl’s assistant. But this source can hardly be called neutral, so the words that were spoken in the boudoir will probably forever remain a well-kept secret. It is a fact, however, that Joséphine, who actually <i>did become</i> Empress, was convinced of Marie-Anne’s precognitive abilities for the rest of her life. The two ladies became close friends, and Marie-Anne even published a biography of Joséphine.</p>
<p class="indent">And what, then, did Napoleon think about the Sibyl? In hindsight he should have had every reason to be pleased with the prediction (if Dumas’ version is reliable). For although he may not have reached Alexander’s or Caesar’s (or Atlas’) level, there was no other ruler in that era that even came close to having Napoleon’s charisma, and who exerted such military and cultural influence. But still it seems he was not at all comfortable with the Sibyl’s presence in the capital, and some time after he came to power, he tried to end all contact between the two friends, Marie-Anne and Joséphine. He later expelled the Sibyl from Paris on occasions—the reason was apparently that she had ventured to prophesy his downfall on the basis of his acquisition of a new female companion, namely Archduchess Maria Amalia of Austria, and also the defeat of his troops in Russia. This liaison, which primarily was initiated because Napoleon wanted an heir, made him abandon Joséphine (who for her part had already been unfaithful to him with a young cavalry officer).</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps Napoleon himself has given us a key to understanding why he, <i>the boss of all bosses</i>, felt threatened—so it seems—by the Sibyl. During his final days, when a captive of the British on the island of St Helena, Napoleon made the following confession to his good friend, General Henri Gatien Bertrand, who records in his diaries, <i>Sketches from St Helena</i>, that:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>She [Mlle Lenormand] drew a picture of this island on a wall panel in an apartment still to be found in Paris, in the Rue de Tournon. She described Longwood and Hudson Lowe for me [i.e. the villa where he was under house arrest, and the British governor of St Helena] … I knew all this already when I was at the height of my power</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">If General Bertrand’s retelling is correct, Napoleon claims the Sibyl foretold this unimaginable state of affairs more than 10 years before it occurred! Certainly not bad—not bad at all… It is further known that Mlle Lenormand predicted ‘a northern crown’ to another of Napoleon’s generals, whose name was Jean Bernadotte. And the very same Jean Bernadotte was later crowned King of Sweden and Norway under the name Carl Johan. A letter in which his wife, Queen Desideria, thanks Mlle Lenormand for her prediction is said to be in the ownership of a Swedish noble family.</p>
<p class="indent">What, then, was the background for the Sibyl’s seemingly impressive accuracy in her predictions? Political flair? Luck? Counterfeit retelling? Or did she really possess an unusual ability of foresight, of premonitions—an ability to receive images and information from a future already laid out there, being present for those who really can ‘see’? This idea that the future is, in some sense, already present is common stock within various occult traditions, and has, in fact, also been considered by serious philosophers and scientists. Such a view is today sometimes referred to as ‘eternalism,’ ‘block time’ and ‘the B-theory of time’—a concept which was expounded in <i>The Unreality of Time</i> (1908) by the English philosopher John McTaggart. A significant comment on this view was made some years earlier by the esteemed physicist Oliver Lodge, who declared: ‘The events may be in some sense in existence always, both past and future, and it may be we who are arriving at them, not they which are happening.’ Special relativity, much in favor with present-day physicists, points to a theory of time similar to B-theory.</p>
<p class="indent">Well, be this as it may, one certainly does not have to be psychic to predict that a consensus regarding these matters will not be reached within a foreseeable future!</p>
<p class="indent">During her long career, Mlle Lenormand was visited by many a foreign dignitary, including the Duke of Wellington, Tsar Alexander I of Russia, Lady Elizabeth Shelley (mother of the poet) and the great Polish composer Frederic Chopin, as well as flocks of nobles, artists and celebrities from all over Europe. In addition, she was also approached by a good number of ordinary men and women. Mlle Lenormand was obviously a tourist attraction; in our day, many head to the Tuileries Garden when they visit Paris—in those days, a number of them might also have taken a trip to the Sibyl’s boudoir. But people came not just for the purpose of entertainment. These were difficult times; first came the French Revolution in 1789, followed by the Reign of Terror; then came the years of the Napoleonic Wars, with their extensive devastation of land and people. And even in peaceful periods diverse diseases posed continual threats on a scale totally unknown to us: tuberculosis was a source of widespread suffering, especially among those living under poor sanitary conditions (it was the cause of about 25 percent of all deaths), while the more democratic flu regularly swept away both high and low, lay and learned. And from the colonies there continually came swarms of murky microbes; for example, the cholera outbreak in Paris in 1832 killed around 20,000 people.</p>
<p class="indent">Mlle Lenormand felt that her mission in this quite scary scenario was ‘to comfort,’ as she said. Because if she could ‘see’ that everything was going to go well with a brother fighting in the war, or a sister who was ill, this could of course be of great help to the family. She would also give her clients the choice: Would the questioner like to hear about <i>everything</i>, or just the good things that she saw? Let’s have a look at an example of how the Sibyl comforted one of her celebrity guests.</p>
<p class="indent">Karl August Freiherr von Malchus (1770–1840) was an eminent person who held prominent posts; among other things, he was minister of finance in the German state of Württemberg, and he also authored a string of scholarly writings on economics. Moreover, he was a good friend of Ludwig van Beethoven. Von Malchus has extensively described his visit to the Sibyl, which took place in 1814. He decided to put her to the test, and therefore arrived on foot and in disguise, so as not to give her any clues regarding his identity, rank or position. In a small excerpt from their meeting we can read the following:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>For example, she said, ‘You nourish great fear related to your family,’ which I certainly did, because I knew my wife and my children had arrived safely at Elsen, but whether they had managed to get to Hildesheim, and if so, how it was with them there, I knew nothing about. ‘But,’ continued the sorceress, ‘you can relax with respect to this, for within eight days you will receive a letter which will contain some things that will not be pleasant for you at all, but it will remove any concern with regard to your family.’ And in fact, on the eighth day, I received a letter from my wife, where she informed me that she and the children were doing well. While the rest of the contents of the letter were not at all suited to please</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Again we must say: Well guessed by the Sibyl! For even if she knew the schedule for the mail coaches (which in those days could be delayed for many a reason), it was not easy to know when—if at all—a letter would arrive, and it would have been close to impossible to know what news the letter would eventually bring to von Malchus. This episode is but one of the stories he recounts. Again—how can this be so? Perhaps those who, like von Malchus, have written about their meetings with the Sibyl in their diaries or letters (and there are actually quite a few who have done so) were those who happened to visit her on a ‘good day’ when she managed a hit—based, perhaps, on a mixture of calculation, intuition and luck? Whereas the others—those who met her on a bad day—perhaps bypassed the matter in silence? Well, this we cannot know with certainty. But interestingly enough, we actually know a little about the experiences that some skeptics had in their encounters with her.</p>
<p class="indent">One of these skeptics was Narcisse-Honoré Cellier-Dufayel, a law professor who was also editor of a journal in which he had written warnings about charlatans. He went to the Sibyl with the intention of rebuking her for tricking money from the credulous and the poor. But, Professor Cellier-Dufayel became so impressed with all that she could tell him about himself, both about his past and his present, that he left totally confused. And within a year, so much of what she had prophesied about his future had happened that he gave in and was ‘converted.’ We know this because Cellier-Dufayel went on to become one of Mlle Lenormand’s closest friends. He also wrote a biography of her, <i>The Truth about Mlle Le Normand: Memories, Intimate Revelations of the Mysteries of the Sybil and her Followers or Consultants</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">Let us end our visit in the Sibyl’s boudoir with the partly irreverent, partly appreciative description from the pen of another skeptic, the English dandy R.H. Gronow. He records the event—which probably took place during his sojourn in Paris in 1815–1816—in his voluminous memoirs. Gronow was by profession a military man, he was one of England’s best marksmen, and he fought in the Battle of Waterloo, where Napoleon—well, met his Waterloo! Whether or not Gronow’s pen was mightier than his gun I cannot say, but it sure must have come pretty close—for just look at how he portrays our good lady:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>It was impossible for imagination to conceive a more hideous being. She looked like a monstrous toad, bloated and venomous. She had one walleye, but the other was a piercer. She wore a fur cap upon her head, from beneath which she glared out upon her horrified visitors. The walls of the room were covered with huge bats, nailed by their wings to the ceiling, stuffed owls, cabalistic signs, skeletons—in short, everything that was likely to impress a weak or superstitious mind. This malignant-looking Hecate had spread out before her several packs of cards, with all kinds of strange figures and ciphers depicted on them</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Her first question, uttered in a deep voice, was whether you would have the grand or petit jeu, which was merely a matter of form. She then inquired your age, and what was the color and the animal you preferred. Then came, in an authoritative voice, the word ‘Coupez,’ repeated at intervals, till the requisite number of cards from the various packs were selected and placed in rows side by side. No further questions were asked, and no attempt was made to discover who or what you were, or to watch upon your countenance the effect of the revelations. She neither prophesied smooth things to you nor tried to excite your fears, but seemed really to believe in her own power. She informed me that I was un militaire, that I should be twice married and have several children, and foretold many other events that have also come to pass, though I did not at the time believe one word of the sibyl’s prediction</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Mlle Lenormand was undoubtedly the most famous, but by no means the only, practitioner of the ‘black arts’ in the ‘City of Lights.’ The authorities tried to impose limitations, but the ‘wild crop’ of occultism—the ideas, the practices—flourished nonetheless in post-revolutionary France, and the peculiar, nocturnal aroma of these ‘cultural belladonna-flowers’ also seeped deep into the velvet curtains of the spectacular Parisian lounges. Francis W. Blagdon’s <i>Paris As It Was and As It Is</i>, an English eyewitness account from 1803, says: ‘At the present day, the ambulating magicians frequent the Old Boulevards, and there tell fortunes for three or four sous…’ Quality-conscious customers, however, despised such low-grade charlatans and instead sought out the</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>fortune tellers of a superior class, who take from three to six francs, and more, when the opportunity offers… Formerly, none but courtesans here drew the cards [for fortune-telling]; now, almost every female, without exception, has recourse to them. Many a fine lady even conceives herself to be sufficiently mistress of the art to tell her own fortune; and some think they are so skilled in reading futurity in the cards, that they dare not venture to draw them for themselves, for fear of discovering some unwanted event</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Since there were reports of a good number of astonishing ‘magnetic’ events—telepathy, clairvoyance, precognition, healing—skilled scientists became engaged in exploring the field. It would probably be fair to say this constitutes the starting point of modern parapsychology. These early efforts can hardly be said to have resulted in significant or lasting conclusions, probably because both the conceptual and the physical apparatus were undeveloped. But as a curiosity, let me mention that a commission of inquiry, appointed by the Academie nationale de médicine, in 1831 concluded that some people actually possess ‘medical clairvoyance’—the ability to diagnose correctly based on clairvoyance. Whether the commission’s successors in today’s National Academy of Medicine would accede to this conclusion, I cannot say.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h79"/>Hymns to the Night—Occultism and Science in German Romanticism</p>
<p class="bq"><i>We are more closely connected with the invisible than with the visible</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Novalis</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h80"/>Bewitched by the Moon</p>
<p class="noindent">Mesmer’s activities gave impetus to the dawning research on the paranormal also in Germany, his homeland. Many observations regarding psi experiences from this period are embodied in the journal <i>Archiv für den Thierischen Magnetismus</i> (<i>Archive for Animal Magnetism</i>). The orientation in the direction of the paranormal fitted well with the dominant cultural movement of the day, namely Romanticism. One could perhaps say that while the philosophers of the French Enlightenment cherished reason, the bright day and the golden sunlight, the German Romantics instead hymned oceans of emotion, the dark night and the silvery moonlight. As part of their reaction to what they saw as the rigid reason of Enlightenment, the German Romantics worshipped all that was mysterious, the enigmatic shadow side of our own psyches—dreams, sleepwalking, possession, irrationality, intuition, inspiration, imagination, and of course the paranormal phenomena.</p>
<p class="indent">In accord with this emotional and experiential approach to the world, Friedrich Schleiermacher, the main Protestant theologian of the Romantic era, declared that what constitutes one’s relationship with God is neither citing a credo nor knowledge, nor morality, but rather it is <i>Feeling</i>. Romantic piety had a markedly pantheistic and mystical trait. God was less and less perceived as a heavenly Father, a strict Judge or a rational Watchmaker, and more and more as an eruptive Cosmic Force, surging forth, continuously creating the Universe and unfolding itself through the life of its creatures. ‘The Spirit slumbers in the stone, dreams in the plant, awakens in the animal and gains consciousness in Man,’ as Friedrich von Schelling, one of Romanticism’s great philosophers, expressed it. Based on such an understanding, God and Nature can almost be seen as two sides of the same coin: ‘Nature is visible Spirit, Spirit is invisible Nature,’ as Schelling says. The German Romantics’ emphasis on emotions, pantheism, nature, and also their fascination with the occult, makes it reasonable to regard them as the true forefathers and -mothers to modern ‘alternative’ movements such as the hippies and various aspects of the New Age.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h81"/>Johann Wolfgang von Goethe—the Paranormal Poet</p>
<p class="noindent">Magic rituals and astrological beliefs are important ingredients in <i>Faust</i>, the main work of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832), Germany’s greatest poet. Moreover, Goethe has related a number of personal experiences with the paranormal. In the famous conversations with his student/friend/secretary, Johan Peter Eckermann, Goethe revealed that he had experienced telepathy several times with his sweethearts (there were quite a few of them…). He also says: ‘Between lovers the magnetic force [Goethe is here using the language of mesmerism] is particularly strong and works even over a very large distance.’</p>
<p class="indent">In the autobiographical work <i>Poetry and Truth</i>, Goethe describes an exciting vision in which he, as he later came to understand it, got a glimpse many years into the future. After a guilt-ridden split-up with his then-lover, Goethe rides off in full gallop through the deep forests along the border between Germany and France. Suddenly he has a vision where he sees his <i>Doppelgänger</i>, his double, riding toward him, wearing a special type of suit that Goethe himself had never worn. The color was ‘pike-grey and with a little gold.’ Eight years later, Goethe is riding down the same forest trail where his double had once appeared—and now it is <i>Goethe</i> who is wearing this very distinctive garment! Goethe recounts that this happened without any conscious planning, so it was not just a staging of a ‘self-fulfilling prophecy.’</p>
<p class="indent">According to a report stemming from Dr August Klemm, Goethe also experienced an interesting and amusing episode in Weimar in 1813. After many hours of working together in a laboratory, Goethe and Klemm are having an evening saunter. Suddenly Goethe starts to behave strangely, gesturing and talking, as if someone is standing in front of him, although the street is completely empty. Klemm becomes worried, wondering if the great poet is in a daze. For listening to Goethe’s words, he realizes that Goethe is experiencing the presence of his good friend, the renowned musicologist Friedrich Rochlitz (who according to their reports was supposed to be in Frankfurt). Goethe starts to laugh, and exclaims: ‘Truly, it’s him! My friend Friedrich!—here in Weimar!—But for God’s sake man, what’s the matter with you? In my dressing gown—with my slippers you’re walking here, right in the middle of the street?’</p>
<p class="indent">After the vision had vanished, both Goethe and Klemm were a little uneasy, wondering if it could have been some sort of bad omen. But when they arrived at Goethe’s home a little later, they had a pleasant surprise: There was Rochlitz, sitting on the couch—wearing Goethe’s dressing gown and slippers! He had come on an unannounced visit, and being wet after a rainfall he had taken the liberty of borrowing some pieces of clothing from Goethe’s closet. After a glass of wine Goethe told Rochlitz about the vision he’d had during his stroll with Klemm. Rochlitz then related that at that very same time he had dozed off on the couch, dreaming vividly about meeting Goethe, who in the dream had exclaimed: ‘In my bathrobe and slippers in the street?’</p>
<p class="indent">A most charming tale! And, if the particulars are reliable, it could also be perceived as a stunning example of clairvoyance and/or telepathy; it would seem that the two men had a shared experience—participating in each other’s worlds, even if physically separated. In <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a> we will find that there are things that may indicate that dreams create favorable conditions for this type of transfer of information.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h82"/>Paranormal Philosophers</p>
<p class="noindent">The great Romantic philosophers, such as Hegel, Fichte, Schelling and Schopenhauer, have all written about occult phenomena, usually in the affirmative, meaning that they saw these occurrences as objectively real and not as subjective chimera. Hegel, often regarded as the most influential philosopher of his day, says that there can be a magical tie ‘between friends, especially female friends with delicate nerves (a tie which may go so far as to show “magnetic” phenomena), between husband and wife and between members of the same family.’ Hegel also writes that under the influence of animal magnetism it may happen that the spirit ‘frees itself from the constraints of time and space, and from all finite contexts.’ Here he refers to what we would call telepathy and clairvoyance. Thus Hegel regards paranormal phenomena as real. He also considers them to be of great importance insofar as they show mechanistic philosophy (i.e. the philosophy of his competitors) to be flawed, being unable to account for such phenomena. But Hegel also thought occult phenomena to be regressive ‘stuff’ that typically would take place with those lacking mental balance—when the spirit/thinking becomes entwined with soul/emotions in an unsound way—and he therefore refers to such experiences as <i>Krankheit</i>, i.e. illness.</p>
<p class="indent">Arthur Schopenhauer, philosophy’s grim pessimist, was convinced of the reality of telepathy, clairvoyance, precognition and magic. He thought all phenomena to be ‘branches on the same trunk’—a view congruent with much modern parapsychology, where psi is often regarded as being basically <i>one</i> phenomenon (consciousness transcending Space, Time and Causality). Schopenhauer’s personal library contained more than 100 books on paranormal topics, and he has also related his own experiences of this kind. One is a charming little telepathic episode from a dinner in Milan. His ‘ravishing hostess’ had asked him if, based on telepathy, he was able to determine on which three numbers she had placed her bet in the ongoing Lottery (it was possible to choose between a great many numbers). Schopenhauer says that, almost as if in a trance, he ‘correctly provided the first and second, but provided the third one incorrectly because her enthusiasm confused me; then I came to myself, and began to reflect.’ Schopenhauer took the incident as a sign he had a smattering of paranormal abilities.</p>
<p class="indent">He also relates an episode of what perhaps may have been a precognitive dream: One day Schopenhauer spilled ink in such a quantity that it flooded his desk and ran down onto the floor. He thereupon called on a housemaid to help him clean up. While doing the job, she told him that she had dreamed about this very situation—her helping him to wipe up ink from the floor—the previous night. Schopenhauer answered that he simply didn’t believe her. But the girl insisted, and said she had also told one of the other maids of this dream. When this second girl entered the room shortly after, Schopenhauer questioned her right away—before the two girls had any chance to confer—and she confirmed that yes, sure enough, she had been informed about this ink-cleaning dream earlier that same day!</p>
<p class="indent">Schopenhauer recounts this little episode, which he swears to be true, in support of his idea that all things in this world happen by necessity, even trifles.</p>
<p class="indent">In Schopenhauer’s <i>Essay on Spirit-Seeing and Related Issues</i> (1851) we get a sense of the great importance of the paranormal in the first half of the 19th century in <i>Deutschland der Dichter und Denker</i>—the Germany of poets and thinkers. Schopenhauer also makes the acerbic quip: ‘Whoever nowadays doubts the reality of animal magnetism and the related clairvoyance ought not to be called unbelieving but rather uninformed.’ Schopenhauer, who had an unusual talent for eloquence and wit, is often quoted as saying: ‘All truth runs through three stages. First, it is ridiculed or distorted. Then it is combated. And finally, it is assumed to be self-evident.’ It seems that he believed this to be the case also for ‘magnetic’ phenomena, but that the third stage had not yet quite occurred.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h83"/>The Doctors Arrive</p>
<p class="noindent">But the gentlemen (unfortunately there were very few women) poets and thinkers were not so much concerned with the practical as with the philosophical aspects of the occult: What do such experiences and phenomena tell us about human beings, about the relationship between people, and about Life and the World? The physicians, however, who now took to the task, had a more practical approach. One of the key figures in the field was Dr Justinus Kerner (1786–1862). He was also a poet, and combined scientific criticism with sensitivity in his approach to psi (as elsewhere, I will, for the sake of simplicity, use the term anachronistically). One of his major works is a ‘medical biography’ of the influencial clairvoyant mystic Friederike Hauffe. Kerner was a highly accomplished author, admired by many, including the great Danish philosopher and writer, Soren Kierkegaard.</p>
<p class="indent">Dr Carl Gustav Carus (1789–1869), a friend of Goethe’s and one of the era’s most versatile scholars, was, in addition to being a physician, also a psychologist, a philosopher and a painter. Carus had immersed himself in Mesmer’s work, and had conducted his own research on visionary dreams, sleepwalking, clairvoyance and possession. The origin of these and related spiritual activities, Carus suggested, was located in a layer in the psyche he believed to exist below the threshold of consciousness, namely ‘the unconscious.’ Though he did not invent the term, Carus is, along with Schelling, the person who is usually credited with introducing this important concept in philosophy—a concept that about half a century later entered the vernacular thanks to Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis and parapsychology have on several occasions promoted ideas closely resembling those of Carus, and which probably have been inspired by, if not taken from, him.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Die deutsche Gründlichkeit</i>, the German thoroughness, began to fasten its grip around the paranormal from the 1870s onward with the launch of the journal <i>Psychische Studien</i> (<i>Psychic Studies</i>); for the ensuing 50 years this would be the main journal of parapsychology in Germany. A noteworthy episode in the intersection between occultism and parapsychology—‘the paranormal tango’—from this period was the astrophysicist Dr Friedrich Zöllner’s investigation of the famous and infamous American medium Henry Slade in 1877–78. Slade had been convicted of fraud in England (the judgment had a somewhat flimsy basis, though, and is said to have been primarily based on prejudice). Nevertheless, Slade had impressed both scientists and skeptics: The physicist and Nobel laureate Lord Rayleigh once brought along a magician to a demonstration of Slade’s, but neither of them were able to understand how he produced his effects. Slade was later tested by Samuel Bellachini, Germany’s most famous magician. After the test, Bellachini issued a signed statement where he declared that it was ‘impossible’ that Slade’s effects could stem from tricks or sleight of hand, and that it would therefore be up to the physicists to provide an explanation.</p>
<p class="indent">Zöllner, who by the way was an expert in optical illusions, experienced some really strange incidents when he was together with Slade: knots on a string became untied in seemingly inexplicable ways, and messages were written on a blackboard, apparently by a telekinetically steered chalk/slate pencil. Hence he was becoming increasingly convinced that Slade was the real deal. However, Zöllner’s positive representation of Slade gave rise, as one would expect, to vigorous debate in parts of the German scientific community, as many thought Slade to be solely an accomplished magician. Zöllner for his part tried to explain the abovementioned and related effects based on the notion that there are more dimensions than the three that for all practical purposes we usually take into account. This concept is sometimes dubbed ‘hyperspace,’ and the idea has been utilized both in geometry and philosophy, and also in science fiction where it will often be introduced to substantiate the possibility of traveling to distant galaxies.</p>
<p class="indent">Zöllner meant that what we experience to be paranormal phenomena could be thought of as ‘shadows’ thrown into our world from a higher dimension. Perhaps this could be illustrated with what happens when I stick my three-dimensional finger (having length, width and height) through the surface membrane of a puddle (the membrane has length and width, but almost no height). Even if the microorganisms living in the membrane should be extremely intelligent, they would—due to a (near) lack of three-dimensional perspective—be unable to perceive the finger in its entirety, and would most likely perceive my intrusion as a paranormal event.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h84"/>Mysticism in Many Dimensions</p>
<p class="noindent">Zöllner’s approach to the paranormal is philosophically fascinating regardless of whether Henry Slade was just an accomplished deceiver or a true paragnost. And Zöllner was not the only one imagining a multidimensional universe. The year 1884 saw the release of the classic satirical novel <i>Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions</i>, written by cleric, grammarian and mathematics teacher, Edwin Abbott. The first part of the book could perhaps best be described as flat-out social satire of certain conditions in Victorian society, while the latter is a brilliant toying with the idea of multiple dimensions.</p>
<p class="indent">The protagonist is a Square who lives in Flatland, a world with only two dimensions. We join Square on his adventures, both in his own flat homeland and also in other ‘lands’, those with fewer dimensions, such as Lineland and Pointland, and those with more, such as Spaceland. In Pointland, the king is completely trapped in his own mind and doesn’t really recognize visitors at all, while in Lineland, the king becomes murderously aggressive toward Square because of his utterly nonsensical talk about there being other countries outside Lineland!</p>
<p class="indent">Square meets with a Sphere coming from Spaceland, where there are three dimensions as there are in our own world. After initiating him in the mystical third dimension, Sphere exhorts Square to spread the ‘Gospel of the Three Dimensions.’ Square refuses, however, ignited by his newly acquired insight that each world is embedded within another, larger world, having one more dimension (dot within line, line within square, square within volume). He has thus become convinced that a three-dimensional world cannot possibly be the end of the story, and that there certainly must be ‘countries’ having even more dimensions!</p>
<p class="indent">In the preamble, Square says that he, who has become ‘initiated into the mysteries of three dimensions having been previously conversant with only two,’ publishes his writings hoping that the readers, living in ‘the Celestial region’ of three dimensions, will ‘aspire yet higher and higher to the secrets of four, five or even six dimensions.’ And toward the close of the book, Square says he is living in the hope that his memoirs ‘may stir up a race of rebels who shall refuse to be confined to limited Dimensionality.’ This surely sounds like an exciting intention!</p>
<p class="indent">The idea of multi dimensions can be demonstrated by imagining entering a theater right in the middle of a movie. You would neither know what is to come nor what has already been. While the director obviously has a completely different perspective—from his/her ‘higher dimension’ the film’s whole action, past, present and future, is known. Perhaps our normal experience of the passage of time—revealing Life in sequences, second by second, day by day, much like a long-lasting film—is primarily due to the limitations of the equipment of our ‘cinema,’ our everyday frame of mind. While in a ‘higher dimension,’ both past and future can be seen as coexisting in an all-encompassing Presence—the dreams of Brahma, the mind of God—or the like.</p>
<p class="indent">This is an old philosophical idea, found in different portrayals, in Europe going back at least to Parmenides (late sixth or early fifth century <small>BCE</small>), whose thesis perhaps best can be summed up as ‘It is’! (the totality of Being—past, present, future—IS, whereas change, becoming, and time are just illusions, a play of the senses.) Could it be possible, for example, through altered states of consciousness, to switch perspective and get an expanded view of this ever-present Presence? Perhaps such an expanded view is what we usually call precognition?</p>
<p class="indent">However, this would no doubt raise some quite complex philosophical questions as to what extent humans can be said to have free will. For, if the future already exists and can be known by precognition, what then about our ability to make choices? Without attempting to give a satisfactory answer—clearly here is material for shelves of books—let me just briefly air the very simple idea that a glimpse from ‘the director’s perspective’ (if at all possible) might not need to constrain either our experience of the film or our free will. Perhaps even just the opposite: that we could have the possibility to ‘cut and paste,’ to make freer and better choices based on the additional information provided by such a glimpse? Like an explorer using binoculars to detect resources and dangers lying ahead, thus becoming able to choose a better route. If so, a glimpse of the future could in fact increase our scope of opportunities, often referred to as ‘freedom.’ Such an opinion is held by the author and medical doctor Larry Dossey, and suggestions for using precognition in our daily lives can e.g. be found in his book <i>The Power of Premonitions: How Knowing the Future Can Shape Our Lives</i>. We’ll get back to the exciting as well as frustrating conundrum of precognition in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a> in connection with some laboratory experiments that—surprisingly enough—seem to indicate that at least some form of precognition <i>is</i> possible.</p>
<p class="indent">While writing this book I have been told a number of spectacular tales, as people trust me to not think they’re crazy (they’re mostly right), which almost merit a separate book. One story came from a man who had been my schoolmate for 12 years. Today he is a man with responsibility and position, and does not lean toward religion, New Age, and suchlike matters. One night he had been out drinking and became ‘three sheets to the wind’ (maybe even four…), as the old expression goes. As he was sleeping it off, he dreamt that a voice told him that a (specified and named) friend of his would win the Lottery. About two weeks later he got a call from this friend, and the conversation went something like this: ‘Listen up!—I’ve got something to tell you!’ Whereupon my schoolmate replied with a ‘taken for granted’ tone of voice: ‘Yes, I know—you’ve won the Lottery.’ And that was actually what had happened: the friend had won several million kroner! Considering the microscopic statistical probability of such a coincidence—the probability was so small it could even be compared to…well, to winning the Lottery!—my schoolmate has started to wonder if there, in fact, might be something to the notion of parallel dimensions.</p>
<p class="indent">The idea of multiple dimensions is very old in esoteric philosophy. In Kabbalah, the Jewish mysticism, there are statements claiming there may be a thousand parallel dimensions! Paranormal events could then be understood as ‘leaks’ from a parallel or higher dimension—a bit like when someone is frying egg and bacon next door, and the smell seeps into our flat, or the music on the upper floor is heard through the ceiling. One of the most exciting theories in recent physics is the so-called M-theory, where the innermost building blocks of nature are thought to be membranes. Physicist Ed Witten, who has been crucial in developing this theory, has said that one can let the M stand for Magic, Mystery or Matrix, ‘dependıng on your taste.’ Witten, who is sometimes referred to as ‘the Einstein of our times,’ operates with the occult thought that the world has no fewer than 11 dimensions! And he does not mean these dimensions should only be perceived to be mathematical models, but that several of them may be folded into one another. Demanding stuff, this is! M-theory’s multiple dimensions are now used by some as part of the explanation for the paranormal.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h85"/>The Lights Are Lit by the Thames</p>
<p class="bq"><i>Ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants to explain all; and if it explains not, then it says there is nothing to explain</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Abraham Van Helsing, vampire hunter, in <i>Dracula</i> by Bram Stoker</p>
<p class="noindent">The late Victorian England saw the rapid emergence of various kinds of occult and esoteric groups. The reasons for this were, among other things, that Christianity had lost part of its power due to the influence of Enlightenment philosophy, and criticism from those engaged in science—biologists, physicists, social theorists, etc. People still asked their questions concerning the larger context and the meaning of Life, but the answers provided by the Churches did not seem as valid as they once were. For example, Darwinism had efficiently undermined (a literal interpretation of) the Bible’s account of human origins. Hence, concerning the Meaning of Life there was a nascent philosophical vacuum—a vacuum that attracted alternative approaches to the Mystery. Hence, Europe’s occult undercurrents resurged from their subcultural riverbeds: Hermeticists, Kabbalists, Rosicrusians and Freemasons were again to have their say and way. The different traditions also intermingled and entered into new relationships and combinations with one other.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the most interesting new occult lodges based on Western hidden traditions was <i>The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn</i>, started in the late 1880s by the Freemasons Robert William Woodman, William Wynn Westcott and Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers. The Order eventually came to include many notable artists and writers: Gerald Kelly, Sax Rohmer, Algernon Blackwood and Arthur Machen among others. And in 1898, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the creator of Sherlock Holmes, also applied for membership. Soon after, however, he withdrew his application. This was because he had received, as he perceived it, an ‘astral visitation’ (i.e. a paranormal manifestation, an apparition) during which a person on the admissions committee examined him for membership! Conan Doyle experienced this incident both as strange and unpleasant, and even if it convinced him of the powers of the Golden Dawn, he was unnerved, and decided, ‘their line of philosophy or development is beyond me.’</p>
<p class="indent">Bram Stoker, author of <i>Dracula</i>, had friends and associates within the high ranks of the Order, and he himself was said to have been a member. (One cannot quite keep track of these secret societies…). As some readers surely will remember, telepathy and clairvoyance play a role in Stoker’s legendary work: Wilhelmina ‘Mina’ Murray, the female protagonist in <i>Dracula</i>, enters into a trance state, where she stays in telepathic contact with Count Dracula. And by exploiting this connection, her friends and the vampire hunter Abraham Van Helsing are able to track the movements of the bloodsucking Count. Later, the poet W.B. Yeats, who was awarded the 1923 Nobel Prize in literature, became Grandmaster (spiritual and ritual leader) of this fascinating Order.</p>
<p class="indent">Beyond the influence of Western occultism—which by the way includes the very word ‘influence,’ which originally referred to the astrological impact of the planets, the emanations ‘floating’ into the Earth through the ether—there were contributions from Eastern spirituality, primarily from Hinduism and Buddhism. The British had had close dealings with these mighty traditions in the colonies, first and foremost through the acquisition of the Empire’s ‘jewel in the crown,’ namely India. Theosophy, the widespread esoteric system of Madame H.P. Blavatsky (who we’ll get back to soon), poured mainly from these Eastern sources. And finally there arose various forms of more ‘home-grown’ spirituality; most importantly were probably the Spiritualist groups. Spiritualism can in part be regarded as a privatized, bourgeois form of religion: By means of séances one could acquire intimate contact with both the spirit world and deceased loved ones in the safety of one’s own home—discreet and comfortable, without having one’s nose exposed to the pungent odor of biblical brimstone.</p>
<p class="indent">Scholarly circles had often adopted some of the basic philosophical concepts of German Romanticism. And to a much higher degree than traditional Christianity, this Romantic pantheism was experienced as being compatible with both science and the occult. For example, it is striking that Darwin’s theory of evolution, which infuriated so many traditional Christians, aroused far less opposition in those circles influenced by the <i>Weltanschauung</i> (worldview) of Hegel. Hegel had proclaimed that the world in itself was a developmental process, through which the <i>Weltgeist</i> (World Spirit, God) realizes itself, step by step, at ever-higher levels. So if humans should prove to originate from apes—well, where is the problem? It was of course intellectuals of this type, with a predominant interest in both philosophy and science, who first shone the Light of Reason on the occult landscapes.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h86"/>The Society for Psychical Research—The Paranormal Detective Bureau</p>
<p class="bq"><i>It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Sherlock Holmes, ‘A Scandal in Bohemia’ by Arthur Conan Doyle</p>
<p class="noindent">In was in 1881 that Sherlock Holmes fetched a good portion of strong shag tobacco from the Persian slipper on the mantelpiece in his apartment in 221B Baker Street. And while the smoke from his pipe rose in grey-blue spirals toward the ceiling, followed by meditative melodies from his Stradivarius violin, Holmes began to shed light on the criminal mysteries that are described in <i>A Study in Scarlet</i> (1887). A year later, in 1882, the Society for Psychical Research (SPR) was founded and began to explore its own brand of mysteries, a quest they engage in to this very day. One quite naturally associates Sherlock Holmes with the SPR, not only because of their shared desire to solve mysteries, but also because Holmes’ creator, the physician Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, was, for many years, a member of this venerable association, whose purpose is to explore ‘events and abilities commonly described as psychic or paranormal, by promoting and supporting important research in this field.’</p>
<p class="indent">It is tempting to see it as a symbol of the <i>Zeitgeist</i>, the spirit of the age, that this research started in the same period as the city of London (and likewise Paris) began to install electric street lighting on a large scale. The hidden nastiness, the prostitution and the violence, the concealed Victorian nightlife—often symbolized by the serial killer Jack-the-Ripper, though he came a little later—was still shrouded in a mantle of impenetrable smog. No—in the name of health, let there be light and air! In a similar way, the SPR intended to throw the light of science into the hidden, dark territories of the psyche and reveal their occult secrets.</p>
<p class="indent">The founders of the SPR were newspaper editor Edmund Rogers and physicist Sir William Barrett. Soon to become important were the prominent philosopher and economist Henry Sidgwick, and historian, philosopher and poet Frederick Myers (who we will return to in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>, on Consciousness). The SPR soon included many of the foremost Victorian scientists, and when the various Nobel committees became established and began distributing their coveted awards, many of these found a home on the mantelpieces of members of the SPR. Thus the SPR was, like other concurrent private academies of science, a distinctly serious club, and many of the members during its first 50 years were political, scientific and cultural celebrities. We’ll allow for a little name-dropping to emphasize this point.</p>
<p class="indent">In the member archives of the SPR are to be found William Gladstone (British Prime Minister—four times!), Arthur Balfour (philosopher, later Prime Minister), Sir William Crookes (physicist, chemist, pioneer in electricity and radiation), Sir Oliver Lodge (physicist, pioneer in electricity and radio technology), John William Strutt, Baron Rayleigh (physicist, pioneer in sound and radioactivity, Nobel laureate) Sir Joseph J. Thomson (physicist, discoverer of the electron, Nobel laureate). In addition, we find as members the authors Lewis Carroll and Robert Louis Stevenson and the poet Alfred, Lord Tennyson.</p>
<p class="indent">Let’s drop some more names, now with a French flavor: Under the waving Tricolor we find such members as Camille Flammarion (astronomer), Marie Curie (physicist and chemist, two times Nobel laureate), Charles Richet (physician, parapsychologist, Nobel laureate) and Henri Bergson (philosopher, Nobel laureate). The great psychiatrists Sigmund Freud and C.G. Jung also signed up with the English club. And finally, in the US, an offshoot of the SPR had around 250 members among the elite of contemporary American intellectuals, scientists, philosophers, doctors and psychologists from the best universities. All in all, the SPR was some society!</p>
<p class="indent">A precursor of, and operating in parallel with, the SPR was the Ghost Club, both of which are still in existence. This association was founded in 1862, and members included from the early days such luminaries as Charles Dickens, Sir William Crookes (pioneer of vacuum tubes), Sir Oliver Joseph Lodge (physicist and patent holder for radio) W.B. Yeats and Frederick Bligh Bond of Glastonbury fame. Over the years, several people were members of both the SPR and the Ghost Club, but the latter always had fewer members and operated more or less like a closed lodge until it became modernized and was ‘opened up’ in 1938 by the psychic researcher Harry Price. Another noteworthy society within the paranormal field was the British National Association of Spiritualists, which was founded in 1873, and which later appointed a scientific committee for the purpose of researching the paranormal. Some members of this association subsequently joined the SPR, which in turn laid down the template for most psychic research for the ensuing decades until J.B. Rhine, the American botanist, in the late 1920s launched his modern statistical methods. Offshoots of the SPR were then formed over large parts of the world. A good website where the SPR regularly publishes new articles can be found at: <a href="http://psi-encyclopedia.spr.ac.uk/">http://psi-encyclopedia.spr.ac.uk/</a></p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h87"/>A Glimpse of Early Research on Psi</p>
<p class="noindent">The SPR formed six committees with the purpose of conducting research on various aspects of the paranormal. Topics examined were: thought and emotion transfer (later baptized ‘telepathy’ by Frederick Myers), mesmerism, hypnotism, clairvoyance, contact with the dead, visions, levitation, and materializations (spirits or physical objects apparently appearing out of thin air). In 1886 the SPR published <i>Phantasms of the Living</i> (Gurney, Myers, Podmore)—a weighty tome that has become a milestone in the history of parapsychology. The work took as its starting point 702 reports of apparitions—sightings, visits, apparently by souls/spirits/ghosts of living persons known to the ‘visited.’ The reports were collected as responses to press appeals. In order to confirm their authenticity, the authors followed up with face-to-face interviews with the percipients who were living all over the country, and also often interviewing their family members and others who might provide supporting testimony. Many of the apparitions were related to ‘crisis-telepathy.’ The essence of this phenomenon is: When one person gets hit by crisis (injury, shock or death), another— related—person gets a strong sense of this specific crisis. The other person is usually a family member or a close friend, who at the time is far away, often in another city or even another country, and has no customary way of knowing about the crisis (this work was, as we know, released long before telephones existed). Let me illustrate the phenomenon ‘crisis-telepathy’ with the following example.</p>
<p class="indent">The famous polar explorer Roald Amundsen, the first person in the world to reach the South Pole, was convinced he could communicate telepathically with other people; this he states in his diaries (1924–1925). And maybe he was right? The renowned author Tor Bomann-Larsen describes in his major Amundsen biography a quite thrilling episode involving Mrs Kiss Bennett, a Norwegian woman married to the English timber baron Charles Bennett, who had become Amundsen’s flame. In June 1928, Amundsen was taking part in the rescue mission of the downed airship <i>Italia</i> that was carrying the Italian explorer Umberto Nobile, when his plane disappeared. Kiss Bennett in a mountain hotel in Norway experienced a telepathic ‘visit’ from Amundsen:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>One morning when I just had put on my stockings, I distinctly heard his voice. ‘Oh Kiss, now comes the terrible death struggle.’ During the next three days I felt his presence in the room so close that I could have touched him. Then suddenly it was all over. I’m sure he died a slow death</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">We now know that Amundsen died on this very journey, probably after having crashed or made an emergency landing close to Bear Island. But Kiss, of course, had no knowledge of this when the ‘visit’ took place. I took the precaution to contact Bomann-Larsen regarding this unsettling incident. He told me that Amundsen had previously disappeared on a couple of occasions, later to reappear alive and well, and that the prevailing perception at the time of the ‘visit’ was that Amundsen most likely would return this time too. Bomann-Larsen also said that Kiss’ portrayal is found in a diary entry of a relative, and was written down following a conversation with her. The information was, however, passed on in confidence, and Bomann-Larsen therefore has chosen not to disclose the source’s identity.</p>
<p class="indent">The archives of the SPR are replete with similar reports of ‘visits’ from beloved ones in crisis. The visits have manifested themselves in the form of visions, sounds and/or distinct bodily feelings. The researchers in the SPR suggested a rational explanation: that these experiences should be understood as telepathy (i.e. the workings of the human mind) and not as hauntings by spirits or the like. <i>Phantasms of the Living</i> is a huge work of over 1,300 pages: lots of witnesses were interviewed and public documentation was collected and signed statements recorded. The critical and ‘disrespectful’ way (as perceived by many) in which the SPR researchers approached spiritual matters—for instance their merciless debunking of the slate writing tricks of the medium William Eglinton, in 1886–87—exposed an incipient schism within the organization, namely between <i>spiritualists</i> on the one side and <i>scientists</i> on the other. And within the following few years many of the ‘true believers,’ among them Stainton Moses, a former vice-president, had left the SPR. So here we see some fiery steps in the aforementioned ‘paranormal tango’—the passionate and conflicted relationship between occultism and parapsychology.</p>
<p class="indent">It was typical of the SPR to conduct their studies in the grand style. When researching spontaneous hallucinations in normal, healthy people (something which occurs from time to time) and trying to identify whether these hallucinations contained telepathic, clairvoyant or precognitive information, the SPR started out with a base material of no fewer than 17,000 reports! From these it was estimated that approximately 10 percent of the hallucinations contained elements of telepathy, clairvoyance and/or precognition.</p>
<p class="indent">The SPR also examined the quality of spiritual mediums, and they became both famous and infamous for their ‘debunking’ of the revered Madame Blavatsky (1831–1891), the charismatic founder of Theosophy. Theosophy is an extensive esoteric system which is based on a variety of both Eastern and Western occult sources, and which has been considerably important for many later esoteric religious groups and for the New Age movement as a whole. Madame Blavatsky acted as a medium who baffled her followers by conjuring the spirits of Koot Hoomi and Morya, two Tibetan spiritual masters. Occasionally, the masters would communicate through letters that apparently materialized right out of thin air. But—the scrutinizing eyes of Richard Hodgson, the researcher who was dispatched to India by the SPR to investigate the case, detected that there were thin, <i>paper thin</i>, cracks in the ceiling in the room where the letters from Koot Hoomi miraculously had materialized. And Madame’s assurance that such cracks were common according to the building standards of the location at that period proved to be of no help whatsoever. This was because her housekeeper, Emma Coulomb, confessed to be an accomplice, and to have dropped the letters through the crack… After further investigation Hodgson wrote a 200-page report where he declared Blavatsky to be ‘one of the most advanced, gifted and interesting impostors in history.’ It was probably not easy for her to decide if she should feel flattered or ashamed by such a description!</p>
<p class="indent">For the sake of balance, let me add that not everybody agrees with the SPR’s assessment of Blavatsky; some have claimed that Emma Coulomb’s testimony was not at all trustworthy as she had earlier tried to blackmail Blavatsky. Furthermore, prominent cultural personalities, including Mahatma Gandhi and the present Dalai Lama, have maintained that both the teachings and the humanitarian efforts of the Theosophical Society are highly valuable, notwithstanding the moral flaws of its founder. The Dalai Lama has shown his support by visiting the headquarters of the Theosophical Society in various countries.</p>
<p class="indent">The SPR considered parapsychology to be a rigorous science that should follow the most stringent requirements for documentation. William James (1842–1910), one of the most influential psychologists in history, writes that should he be asked to name a scientific journal that has exemplary procedures in identifying facts and exposing flaws, he would refer to the SPR’s journal, the <i>Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research</i>. James explains this was because all the witnesses, as far as possible, were personally cross examined, the background facts were checked, and documentation was of the same objective quality as legal abstracts, so that anyone could form an independent picture on the strength of the evidence. Occultist and Nobel laureate in literature W.B. Yeats humorously said that the SPR’s researchers were critical and scrutinizing to such a degree that had they been present when the World was created—to make sure that everything proceeded in an orderly fashion—they would have given God performance anxiety to such an extent that he would have been unable to complete the job!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h88"/>Three Approaches to Psi—Laboratory, Nature, Spirituality</p>
<p class="noindent">If we were to outline the ways which, from James’ days and until our own time, we have related to psi in a serious way, we might talk about three main approaches: The first has its focus on experiments and is keen to engage in rigorous science on the paranormal. The second has a more natural practical approach to psi in relation to lived life. While the third approach emphasizes the spiritual aspect of psi, seeing paranormal phenomena as possible clues and connections to <i>the</i> big picture.</p>
<p class="indent">1. <i>Laboratory</i>: This approach claims that paranormal phenomena should be investigated in the same way as any other natural phenomena, thus the use of rigorous laboratory experiments is the best way to go. In the late 1920s, J.B. Rhine, the American botanist, launched rigorous statistical methods to evaluate telepathy, clairvoyance and precognition related to the drawing of cards. Nowadays, refined methods and advanced apparatus are utilized, as for instance MRI and fMRI (types of brain scans). Widespread are also experiments involving so-called <i>ganzfeld</i> (German, meaning ‘total field’), where the test subjects’ vision, hearing and other perceptions will be muted as far as possible. The idea is that subduing sensory ‘noise’ will make it easier to pick up the psi ‘vibes,’ such as inner images containing possible telepathic information. One avid ‘laboratorian’ is the engineer and psychologist Dean Radin, head of research at the Institute of Noetic Sciences. This is an important research center founded by Apollo 14 astronaut and MIT engineer Dr Edgar Mitchell (who, by the way, during his stay in space personally tested out the possibility of making telepathic contact with people on earth—reportedly with positive results!).</p>
<p class="indent">2. <i>Nature</i>: The second camp rather concurs with Jean-Jacques Rousseau and his classic call to ‘return to Nature.’ The psi-abilities (to the extent they are real) are developed as part of the natural evolution of humans. In prehistoric times the point of such abilities most probably was to survive: to avoid danger, to cry out for help, and to find partners. Therefore eventual psi-abilities will most likely be activated in demanding situations similar to those experienced by humans since prehistoric times. The epitome of such original psi is <i>crisis telepathy</i>, which quite often has been reported to occur in connection with shock, injury or death, as in the case with Roald Amundsen and Kiss Bennett mentioned earlier in this chapter. The reason that the SPR felt that it was its responsibility to investigate this phenomenon was precisely the multiple accounts of it that were circulating. Crises are prototypical of a human <i>Urerfahrung</i>—an original experience—where telepathy possibly could have been of use to summon help from kinsmen. Thus a realistic study of the psi-abilities, the Nature camp argues, must take this into account. And for just this reason psi should not primarily be studied in sterile laboratories but in real life—in our contact with other human beings and with animals. Some anthropologists take this approach to psi, as does the English biologist and former Cambridge fellow Rupert Sheldrake.</p>
<p class="indent">3. <i>Spirituality</i>: And then we have the third faction, which emphasizes the spiritual aspect of psi. From spiritual traditions worldwide there are reported innumerable psi experiences taking place in connection with meditation, dance, prayer, trance, ecstasy, etc. Based on these accounts it seems psi typically tends to occur when people are searching intensely for Meaning, probing the depths of their soul. This aspect of psi was, as we saw in the previous chapter, underscored by C.G. Jung, and is also common in other branches of transpersonal psychology, i.e. the schools of psychology that emphasize our connectedness to the Whole. Among researchers with this orientation psi phenomena is often seen as a sign that ‘what in us that is bigger than us’ (the archetypes, our higher self, our spiritual guides, etc.) has been activated. Thus they will typically connect with spiritual traditions providing a framework for dealing with and utilizing such experiences, as shamanism, yoga, Sufism, Kabbalah, etc. Important figures within the transpersonal, psi-positive camp are psychiatrists C.G. Jung, Roberto Assagioli and Stanislav Grof, and psychologists Stanley Krippner, Charles Tart and William Braud.</p>
<p class="indent">There is not necessarily any implacable enmity between these three camps; some researchers can stroll peacefully between the three. The aforementioned Stanley Krippner was involved in laboratory experiments on dream telepathy for many years (we’ll get back to this research in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>). But Krippner has also done paranormal fieldwork (in Brazil), and moreover he is open to the spiritual aspect of psi (as a possible way to connect with ‘the More,’ with the bigger picture). However, even though there are no absolute divisions, this tripartite model nonetheless is of help to clarify different strains of thought.</p>
<p class="indent">The ‘laboratorians’ will not necessary hold studies by, say, anthropologists and ethnologists to be of immense value, as they are not fully replicable, nor are the results measurable in the positivistic sense (no grams, centimeters, ounces, inches, degrees, etc.). Of what help to science is it that people who are interviewed—the so-called ‘qualitative method’—tell of being cured after visiting a healer, when there aren’t any brain scans, either of the healer or of the patients, to find out what is going on physiologically? (Let me parenthetically add that even if the research is not unambiguous, some studies indicate that there likely will be increased theta activity, i.e. more brainwaves with 4–7 cycles per second.)</p>
<p class="indent">Further, the laboratorians tend not to be forthcoming as to how psychics, healers, soothsayers, gurus, etc. carry out their ‘black arts.’ For mantra chanting can easily drown out the quiet, sober voice of reason, and fogs of incense cover areas that ought to lie bathed in the clear, cool light of science.</p>
<p class="indent">Hardliners in the Nature camp highlight the utter irrelevance of sitting in a lab, guessing about drawing cards, throwing dice, color blinks on a screen, and the like. Building research on such petty games, they say, reveals a complete lack of sound judgment. Psi should be dealt with <i>existentially</i>, investigated as the tools in our primeval survival kit, as prehistoric alarm systems and mobile phones. And the Spiritualists are quick to point out these faculties lie at the very base of human consciousness and transcend the limitations of the ego, and might therefore serve as hotlines to the depth of the soul, to Being, Life, the Universe, Cosmos, the Great Spirit, God.</p>
<p class="indent">Both the latter approaches to psi—the Natural and the Spiritual—seem to concur very well with the large number of reports indicating that <i>intense engagement</i>—whether in war or in love, in crisis or in ecstasy—was a contributing factor for psi to manifest. For instance, the Scottish healer Bruce MacManaway claimed that his healing abilities became activated during World War II in connection with a grenade strike that badly injured one of his comrades. Whereas the opposite state of mind—boredom, that is—seems to be an impediment to psi function. Laboratory research on psi, consisting of endless repetitions for hours and days on end, could therefore perhaps be compared to—if I may be allowed—a sexologist doing erection research on test subjects immersed in a pool of ice-cold water. The frame conditions in the experiment effectively prevent the phenomena in question from arising (so to speak…).</p>
<p class="indent">This example is much more than a pure—or impure—wisecrack; the significance of the frame conditions seems to be reflected in the fact that different psi researchers get very different results. This fact is so palpable that the English psychologist and psi-researcher Dr Adrian Parker, professor of psychology at the University of Gothenburg, Sweden, has dubbed it ‘The First Law of Parapsychology.’ It turns out that scientists who are enthusiastic and have expectations that, say, telepathy or clairvoyance will occur tend to get more ‘hits’ than researchers with the opposite attitude. And take note: this does not <i>necessarily</i> have to do with over- or under-reporting, or differences in the honesty or competence of the researchers. Perhaps it would be apt to compare it with team sports: A coach with confidence in the team’s possibilities, who creates enthusiasm, will as a rule get them to perform better and score more often than a skeptical coach. And given that they actually exist, psi-powers will most probably, like all other human faculties, be influenced by one’s state of mind. It seems obvious that if the conductor of the experiments—‘the coach’—has negative expectations this will hardly create a state of mind optimally ‘psi-conductive.’</p>
<p class="indent">We will have a closer look at the three main approaches to psi—<i>Laboratory, Nature, Spirituality</i>—elsewhere. <i>Laboratory</i> has been awarded most of <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>, where we look at some exciting experiments supporting the psi hypothesis. <i>Nature</i> is discussed in <a href="14_chapter09.xhtml">chapter 9</a>, and <i>Spirituality</i> is briefly discussed in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a> in conjunction with C.G. Jung and transpersonal psychology, and will also be commented on again in depth in <a href="14_chapter09.xhtml">chapter 9</a>.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h89"/>Snapshots from Paranormal Norway</p>
<p class="noindent">As the reader has probably already noticed this book is markedly oriented toward the international; haven’t we already visited all continents at least once?—I think so, and more is yet to come! But as the author is Norwegian, I think it may enrich the palate if I give a little mention to ‘stuff’ from Norway. Due to space considerations I’ll restrict myself to serve just a little paranormal finger food and some tidbits, but as we know, small canapés can sometimes be just as satisfying as a dinner!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h90"/>Research and the Paranormal</p>
<p class="noindent">My background is in the humanities, where research on the paranormal has focused not so much on the <i>phenomena</i> as on the <i>stories</i> about them, and where the patterns in storytelling, mythological motives, ideas about magic, etc. are eagerly analyzed. While all this may be well and good, the downside is that tales about psi are often reduced to exercises in literary theory—and suddenly one’s own map has become much more important than the terrain! I don’t concur with such an approach, and as the reader perhaps may have noticed my focus is solely on <i>what</i> is told about the paranormal and not on <i>how</i> it is told.</p>
<p class="indent">From the 1990s onwards Norwegian paranormal research has been mainly conducted within the framework of social science and the focus has often been on—forgive me, ye sociologists!—trivial stuff such as changes in society’s belief systems and the like. Sociologists often try to determine the reasons for people believing in paranormal phenomena by asking ‘diagnostic’ questions, such as ‘<i>Why</i> do people believe in such things as healing, clairvoyance and spirits?’ And the answers sociologists tend to find—that people believe in the paranormal because of, say, the estrangement of modern men and women, the privatization of religion, the yearning for resacralization (that the World again become holy), etc.—only serve to uphold the perception of paranormal phenomena as <i>symptoms</i> (of cultural and/or personal crisis). Though not bluntly false, such a view on the paranormal is—in my perhaps not-so-humble opinion—as limiting as it is boring. I’ll give the sociologists a clue for free: the reason why people believe in such things is that quite often they have experienced them…</p>
<p class="indent">So—paranormal research in Norway has focused on the stories and on society and there has been surprisingly little scholarly interest in the paranormal <i>per se</i>. Now, why is that? Well, the most likely reason seems to be the <i>stigma</i> that goes with superstition, or ‘parapsychosis’ as it was humorously dubbed by the playwright and critic Helge Krog. The prominent poet and translator André Bjerke is one of the few scholars who has publicly confessed to a keen interest in the paranormal and he once gave a witty description of the abovementioned stigma:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>It is more dangerous for a professor to be caught redhanded doing research [on the paranormal] than it is for a Conservative politician to be found dead drunk in a brothel. What hitherto has dictated university science’s sentiment towards parapsychology is an anxious sidelong glance towards colleagues: ‘If it becomes known that I’ve seen a ghost, I’m done for at the faculty.’</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">This is more than just a joke. I once spoke with a respected university professor, trying to convince her about going public with her <i>real</i> views on clairvoyance (which she is convinced is real). It was all but easy… The ‘emperor’s wrath’ as described in <a href="08_chapter03.xhtml">chapter 3</a>—i.e. thumbs down from colleagues, loss of prestige, position and pennies—ruthlessly rules the land! So even if Norway in some respects may be a country of otherness, most scholars are pretty much as scholars anywhere else, welcoming—for somewhat different reasons—neither polar bears nor paranormal phenomena into their offices!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h91"/>Scholarly Mavericks</p>
<p class="noindent">The Norwegian Society for Psychical Research, which today is called the Norwegian Parapsychological Society, was founded in 1917 and modeled on the SPR, the Society for Psychical Research, with which we have become acquainted earlier in this chapter. So last summer the Norwegian Parapsychological Society celebrated its 100 years jubilee—hooray! But as research on psi has had low status, ambitious scientists for their own good have mostly stayed far away from these muddy matters, and a proper research milieu was never established. Nonetheless, there have been a few skilled academics who—to the detriment rather than to the development of their careers—have engaged in parapsychology.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h92"/>Harald K. Schjederup: Jack of Many Trades—Master of All!</p>
<p class="noindent">The most prominent parapsychologist was perhaps the versatile philosopher, psychologist and psychoanalyst Harald K. Schjelderup (1895–1974). Schjelderup, who had also studied nuclear physics, was tenured as professor of philosophy at the University of Oslo in 1922 at the age of just 27. In 1928 his professorship was restructured and subsequently he became Norway’s first professor in psychology. Schjelderup published numerous books and scientific articles and was also internationally recognized. The Norwegian Biographical Encyclopedia states that Schjelderup was ‘above anyone else the one who built up psychology as a clinical discipline and university subject at the University of Oslo.’ In his honor the premises of the Department of Psychology is named the Harald Schjelderup House.</p>
<p class="indent">Schjelderup, then, was definitely no fool; rather he was quite ingenious. But he had his occult side… In addition to his conventional respectable scholarly work Schjelderup for many years headed the Norwegian Parapsychological Society. His research within this field can be found summarized in an excellent book, <i>The Secret Man: Unconscious and Unknown Forces in the Life of the Soul</i>, where he theorizes about and relates multiple (seemingly) telepathic incidents from his clinical practice. The book has been reprinted several times and is established as <i>the</i> point of reference in Norwegian parapsychological literature. Links to the free download of this and the other Norwegian books mentioned below can be found in the bibliography.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h93"/>Arvid Aas: The Psychic Psychologist</p>
<p class="noindent">One of Schjelderup’s most gifted students was Arvid Aas (1925–1969), who went on to become Norway’s first professor in <i>clinical psychology</i> (which focuses on diagnosis/treatment). It was Aas’ own psi-experiences that made him change his studies from medicine to psychology, as he repeatedly had dreams that were seemingly precognitive. For example, some weeks before his graduation in high school Aas had a dream that revealed to him the topic he would be tested on in his mathematics exams. On the basis of the dream Aas went to his teacher and asked whether he considered this specific theme to be a likely subject for the upcoming test, but the teacher replied in the negative. Nevertheless, the dream proved true, and Aas, who had listened to his dream rather than his teacher, was more than usually prepared—‘paranormally well prepared’ could perhaps be the <i>mot juste</i>—and thus got a good grade! Aas was the main editor of the Festschrift for Harald Schjelderup’s 70th birthday, called <i>Research Journeys in the Depths of the Mind</i>. If he had not passed away quite early in his career, Aas would most likely have further developed the parapsychological lifework of Schjelderup.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h94"/>Georg Hygen: Biologist of Mystical Habitats</p>
<p class="noindent">The Norwegian scientist who, in addition to Schjelderup, was most systematically engaged in the paranormal was biologist Professor Georg Hygen (1908–1994). For several years he was president of the Norwegian Parapsychological Society. Hygen founded the society’s journal <i>Parapsychological Notes</i>, and authored, edited and initiated a string of books within the field. He also wrote <i>Vardøger: Our National Paranormal Phenomenon</i>. Vardøger, which seemingly is more common in Norway than in most other countries, means that a person’s approach is heard—say the sound of a car stopping outside, the opening of an entrance door, footsteps on the stairs—well before the arrival actually occurs. Hygen also wrote a popular book about telepathy, <i>Telepathy: Our Innate Cell Phone</i>.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h95"/>Three Cases from the Field</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h96"/>The Snåsa Man</p>
<p class="noindent">Norway has had from the Viking age a tradition of people who have ‘warm hands’ (healers) and the ability to ‘see’ (psychics). In rural areas this tradition is still alive, and several well-documented biographies have been written about people with such powers from our own times, e.g. Marcello Haugen, Lodvar Kaarstad, Anna Elisabeth Westerlund, Paul Hagerup, Ivar Flatmo, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">Today’s most prominent healer and psychic is without comparison Joralf Gjerstad (b.1926), the so-called ‘Snåsa Man,’ named after the village where he lives. First and foremost Gjerstad is famous as a healer; he has received patients from several countries and during his long career has reportedly had more than 40,000 visitors! Gjerstad has also been consulted many times as a clairvoyant, assisting the Red Cross and the police in searching for lost persons. In 2008 Gjerstad rose to almost meteoric fame after his life was penned by the renowned biographer Ingar Sletten Kolloen, who has also written about Knut Hamsun. In the aftermath, Gjerstad toured the country for many months and thus became a household name in Norway. It is probably no exaggeration to say that at least once a week one of the big newspapers run a story about the ‘Snåsa Man.’</p>
<p class="indent">Gjerstad has never taken any money for his services, believing that his claimed faculties are gifts from God and thus should be shared with others for free. He is generally very well liked, coming across as genuinely humble, free of the self-aggrandizement so typical of many ‘gurus.’ And having also been a local politician for the Labor Party, Gjerstad is often seen as the miracle man ‘from the people and for the people.’ He has even received the King’s Medal of Merit in silver for his unselfish services. But of course, there has also been some controversy; the avid skeptic Ronnie Johanson has written a couple of books, claiming that the healings are due to the placebo effect, and that Gjerstad has accepted gifts as payment-in-disguise. Further, that Gjerstad is not to be trusted as he, according to Johanson, has told different—contradictory—versions of episodes involving his alleged abilities in clairvoyance and precognition.</p>
<p class="indent">In 2016 the award-winning filmmaker Margreth Olin released a moving documentary about Gjerstad, where we follow him meeting and treating a series of patients, young and old. The film also has a section with follow-up interviews carried out a few months later. Some patients tell about initially feeling better, but without having experienced any long-term improvements. Whereas others claim that some of the positive effects are—at least so far—lasting. We shall look at some seemingly inexplicable events concerning the Snåsa Man in later chapters.</p>
<p class="indent">With respect to the international scene, let me mention that the Snåsa Man—who reportedly predicted the assassination of President John F. Kennedy a few days before it happened—has recently made the eerie prediction that the 45th President of the United States, Donald Trump, will suffer the same fate! In an interview with the local newspaper <i>Namdalsavisa</i> on January 17, 2017, the Snåsa Man says: ‘They are going to get him. Trump will be shot.’ He further says: ‘Yes, I am disappointed with the Americans. They have made a scary choice.’ With a little help from our multilingual friend Google Translate it should be possible for English speakers to read this—largely biographical, and non sensationalist—interview (link is found in the bibliography). According to scores of testimonials, the Snåsaman is a first rate healer, but is he also a reliable prophet? We’ll see...</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h97"/>The Paranormal Lawyer (or Liar?)</p>
<p class="noindent">One of the strangest books ever published in Norway—yet to be taken seriously—is <i>From an Unknown World</i> (1976) by the lawyer Thomas L. Aall, released by Cappelens Forlag, a respected publisher. The author, who belonged to an old, well-known and quite influential family that includes notable scholars, describes weighty personal paranormal experiences by the score: clairvoyance, telepathy, healings, telekinesis, poltergeists, ghosts, forebodings of death, etc. In the preface, the experienced and respected editor Waldemar Brögger says he doesn’t know how such phenomena can be explained, but that he is confident that the author has experienced the events described. Aall had been an acquaintance of Brögger’s for around 30 years, and in that context Brögger finds it ‘completely and wildly implausible’ that the recounted events should be just fabrications.</p>
<p class="indent">Aall was, as stated, a lawyer, obviously a somewhat ‘macho’ kind of guy, whose leisure activities were logging and boxing. He describes himself as ‘not only a quick and agile boxer—I was also able to punch more than commonly hard.’ Aall says modestly that he does not call himself ‘a psychic’ since the paranormal phenomena occurred spontaneously and were (to a large extent) beyond his control. And as he, by temperament, was more of a skeptic than a believer, he felt such experiences to be a disturbance rather than a blessing.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>With my orientation towards this planet and the delights of this world, my contempt for illusions in virtually all fields of life, my belief in the present and the tangible and nothing else—they [the paranormal phenomena] fit my intellect and my orientation much like a silk stocking which forcibly is pulled over a hedgehog; with an unpleasant lack of harmonic orientation as a result</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Hence Aall’s story is intriguing, not only because of the enigmatic events depicted, but also on account of the author’s relationship to them: analytical and reflective, not trading in any cheap sensationalism. His style of writing, charming and idiosyncratic as it is—a combination of quirky humor and deep seriousness—conveys a dense and arresting atmosphere, apparently much akin to the unknown world he is describing. Difficult to argue, of course, but one almost inevitably gets a feeling of <i>authenticity</i>, regardless as to how these events should be explained.</p>
<p class="indent">Aall casually depicts several humorous episodes, such as the chapter ‘An Unusual Visit to the Doctor,’ where he describes how his consciousness one night spontaneously moves off—a so-called ‘astral projection’—to an unknown doctor’s office. He is able to observe multiple specific details of the interior of the office, for example an orange lamp shaped as a cluster of grapes. But alas! Aall suddenly also gets to see his girlfriend being very thoroughly ‘examined’—I shall refrain from further descriptions—by a young physician. Aall takes note of the physician’s appearance, especially his peculiar hair, its cut and color. This weird phenomenon takes place about once a week for a couple of months before stopping altogether. Somewhat later Aall hears from the sister of his girlfriend that she (his girlfriend) during this period, in fact, had been dating a young doctor with looks very closely resembling Aall’s observations! Not a very pleasant experience, obviously, but he kept his composure.</p>
<p class="indent">Aall’s trepidation in connection with other experiences could, however, be considerable. While traveling abroad during World War II he suddenly experienced a projection of his consciousness. This time he found himself located in the gallery of the church in his hometown, hearing mighty baroque music from the organ—‘vaults and walls vibrated under the fullness of chords in the bass.’ Meanwhile, down in the aisle, six men are carrying a coffin. Aall notices with interest the pallbearers’ asymmetrical attire: ‘Five were in dark overcoats. The sixth had a light spring coat and a dark scarf around his neck.’ So far the scene is peaceful. Aall is poised and harmonious at heart: ‘I found myself perfectly well.’ But suddenly he hears <i>The Voice</i>: ‘Thomas! It-is-your-mother! But-she-can-be-saved-if-you-go-home-now!’ I daresay most of us would have become alarmed if experiencing something of this nature, as does Aall: ‘Suddenly the situation had changed… I felt goosebumps spread, nerves contract, panic creeping into every pore and all the corners of my mind.’</p>
<p class="indent">Aall assumes that the projection of consciousness lasts for about half an hour. During this time he undergoes a crisis on several levels. His body is actually in a far-off country while he perceives himself to be located in the church of his hometown! In the aftermath more difficulties ensue. He is thrown into painful quandaries about what to do. Should he dismiss the whole experience as nonsense, or organize a trip home (not easily done during the war) to urge his mother, who to his knowledge was in the best of health, to undergo a medical examination? A long story cut short: Aall travels home and persuades his mother to visit the doctor. As the doctor finds nothing to worry about, just some trifling problem, her treatment is postponed some months. This proves to be fatal, as it was not a trifling problem—it was cancer…The scene at the grave seems so strangely familiar to Aall due to the pallbearers’ asymmetrical attire: ‘At the funeral, an icy winter day during the war, six men carried… Five were in dark overcoats. The sixth had a light trench coat with a blue scarf around his neck…’</p>
<p class="indent">I have given here only a short excerpt from this eerie story; I still get shivers when I read it in its entirety. His recounting seems authentic—this is something he has truly experienced (I shall refrain from alternative explanations of what could ‘really’ have happened). In hindsight Aall ruminates extensively on destiny vs. freedom: He believes he has ‘seen’ future events in a similar way on several occasions. And also that things thus ‘seen’ would later occur regardless as to whether or not he tried to prevent them. If this should be the case—that it really is possible to ‘see’ the future—what then would be the consequences? Is it really possible to change the future if it is already ‘written on heavenly tablets,’ or in some parallel dimension? And what happens to free will and self-determination if we indulge in such fatalistic ways of thought?</p>
<p class="indent">Later in life, Aall became a Catholic—of a kind, as he still continued to doubt almost everything. Thus he chose the baptism name ‘Thomas,’ after the disciple famous for doubting Christ’s bodily resurrection. Aall says wittily that as to which baptism name he should choose, there was <i>no</i> doubt…</p>
<p class="indent">Some time after his conversion word reached Aall that a certain Mr H. was terminally ill with cancer of the kidneys. This was a man who had once come to Aall’s assistance when he had been severely injured by an axe (during logging, nothing criminal involved…). Mr H. was now hospitalized and, according to what Aall was told, had only a few hours left to live. Hearing this, Aall feels impelled to pray for—or perhaps we could also say ‘send healing to’?—this terminally ill man (who, by the way, was not informed about Aall’s initiative). And then, going deeply into prayer, Aall experienced an ‘unknown Power who takes possession of one in a way I cannot explain or fully describe. It’s like experiencing a partial inner division, infused with fear, that I am at the mercy of rather than being able to evoke.’ Aall clearly enters a special state of altered consciousness through this mystical prayer. And what happens? Well, according to Aall, Mr H. survives and one month later is discharged from the hospital!</p>
<p class="indent">To get the whole story, Aall later contacts Mr H., who recounts the following:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>It was like I had abandoned the body, and hovered for a while below the ceiling of the infirmary. I saw my body lying there, saw those standing around, saw it all. Next, it was as if I was led through the ceiling, out of the infirmary, over the roof of the hospital. I saw the city, the earth beneath me, saw everything clearly. And I moved with terrifying speed toward a very bright light, and it was a wonderful feeling; I felt so free, what shall I say, so detached from all ties heading toward this enormous light… But then, suddenly, it was like I felt a hand grabbing me in the neck and forcing me back to earth and into the body again…</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Our man is not called Thomas for nothing, and the following dialogue takes place: Aall: ‘Are you willing to answer me quite frankly one question?’ Mr H.: ‘Well, if I can.’ Aall: ‘Were you happy to return to your body and to this life here?’ The man was obviously reluctant to answer, hence Aall emphasizes that he does not want politeness but the truth. Mr H. then responded: ‘Well, when you put it that way, I shall have to tell it like it was, and that is, No. I would have preferred to be spared (the return) then.’ He explained this is because he experienced ‘such a wonderful freedom and I was so happy; yes, I can almost say that I was elated!’</p>
<p class="indent">Many people having had a near-death experience describe quite similar scenarios and emotions as Mr H. Spontaneous remissions of cancer also occur from time to time, but as Mr H. obviously had at least one-and-a-half feet in the grave, I think this case—if true—still must be considered quite exceptional. What I find unique in Aall’s way of recounting the case is that he openly informs us that this man, so miraculously cured, had preferred to die! Many—I think it is fair to say <i>most</i>—healers/preachers/gurus, etc. in a similar situation would have been irresistibly tempted to use the incident for propaganda purposes: ‘Prayer answered, healed on his deathbed, a miracle of biblical proportions, God is (or, I am) surely great!’ While Aall, on the other hand, is neither blowing his own trumpet as some God-sent healer, nor is he currying favor with fellow Christians. He rather takes the sheen off the whole thing, leaving us with a puzzling feeling of ambiguity: ‘A miracle… perhaps… but to what end, really?’</p>
<p class="indent">I feel this rigorous honesty to be a testimonial to Aall’s integrity—that for him truth presides over illusions. And this of course also makes me more ready to consider his stories to be more than fantasy. It is a pity that Aall’s extraordinary and exciting account has yet to be translated into English—I’ll see what I can do about it!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h98"/>Poltergeist—No Child’s Game…</p>
<p class="noindent">In press reports from 2010, Lalm kindergarten in Gudbrandsdalen (meaning Gudbrand’s Valley) appeared to be a veritable haunted house. Between April 26 and June 15, all 15 employees witnessed diverse objects—cups, mugs, stones, jars, etc.—flying through the rooms! Sometimes these items seemed to appear out of thin air. In addition doors opened and closed by themselves, figures were drawn with crayons moved by no one’s hand (no human’s hand that is…), feathers used for decoration organized themselves into specific patterns, and so on. More than 90 seemingly inexplicable episodes occurred. And, interestingly enough, many of these events were observed by two or three adults simultaneously. In some cases there were even as many as 20 witnesses.</p>
<p class="indent">At first it was—of course—assumed that tricksters, young or grown-ups, were to blame. But since no one was ever caught and since the strange activities also eventually came to involve heavier objects and louder noises, both adults and children became increasingly perturbed. At last it was decided to take some action to end the turmoil. But how does one take action against something like this? Well, a priest was called in, and having him ‘do his thing’ provided, in fact, some alleviation. It proved short-lived, though, and the phenomena gradually returned. Then a clairvoyant was summoned, and after she did ‘her thing’ the relief—by cause or by coincidence—proved to be lasting. And subsequently Lalm kindergarten has only seen and heard the type of activities and noises that are <i>supposed</i> to occur in kindergartens.</p>
<p class="indent">However, all these strange phenomena had sparked off an interest in understanding what on earth had been going on! Therefore psychology professor Kjell Flekkøy was sent for. Flekkøy is a highly respected professional; he is a specialist in neuropsychology (the connection between brain and behavior) and is professor emeritus at the University of Oslo, and he has also been professor at Ullevaal hospital. Flekkøy has often prepared evaluations and reports for courtrooms and acted in other public and official capacities. In addition to his own expertise, Flekkøy requested assistance from a professor of physics at the University of Oslo.</p>
<p class="indent">Following inspections and interviews Flekkøy wrote a report where he outlined a cluster of possible explanations for the uncanny phenomena:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>There are six alternative interpretations of these observations: (a) child’s games, (b) lies, (c) psychosis, (d) delusion/mass suggestion, (e) tricks and (stage) magic, (f) the incidents witnessed by many are physically real</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Flekkøy is of course well aware that these are exceptional circumstances he is evaluating, and in the introduction he says:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>In the following, I’ll discuss the basis for confidence in the data, even if this thematically belongs in the discussion section. The reason is this: the phenomena portrayed are so unusual and little understood that the reader will be reluctant to take them seriously, as is the case with this report. Therefore it is necessary to evaluate the basis for confidence in the data as a first step</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">One gets a clear picture of what Flekkøy means when reading the factual part of the report:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Smaller objects suddenly appear without a sound ‘like out of the air’ at eye-height, eventually at ceiling height, hit the ground, always with a louder than usual sound, but with an otherwise normal character of sound. Where starting-points are located [it appears that] the movements have a very abrupt start with an ‘explosive’ character; the object whips away. Especially initially, the items concerned were mostly small and lightweight (a toy hammer, keys, blackboard magnets, etc.; see attached images); later also larger objects</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">The flying objects are also said to have behaved in an unusual way:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Breakable objects made of glass or ceramics do not smash into pieces as opposed to our usual experience with such items (cups, jars). When hitting the walls no marks are made despite what would be expected based on the item’s weight, shape, speed and direction (e.g. a glue stick). On one specific occasion a jar of jam with a screw cap of metal was crushed to very small fragments after hitting the wall—but without leaving any mark on the wall</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">These indeed peculiar events, according to the accounts of the kindergarten staff, would often be accompanied by unpleasant sensations—feelings of pressure in the head, sensations of cold, putrid odor, and sometimes also noises, such as bangs and crackles. In short: Here has been a poltergeist afoot! Within traditional occultism, activities of this kind will, as mentioned in <a href="08_chapter03.xhtml">chapter 3</a>, often be blamed on spirits, goblins or the like. Whereas, in parapsychology they will be seen rather as a chaotic form of <i>psychokinesis</i>, a human ability, usually lying dormant. This assumption is partly based on the fact that poltergeist activities often seem to be linked to the presence of certain people; e.g. typically sensitive teens with dire inner conflicts. When such people are away say on holiday, or become more stable and harmonious, the poltergeist tends to disappear. (A cynical approach would be to say that this is due to the removal of the likelihood and/or the need to fake this sort of drama…)</p>
<p class="indent">An illustrative example would be the English healer Matthew Manning, briefly mentioned in <a href="08_chapter03.xhtml">chapter 3</a>. Manning tells of telekinetic episodes with heavy furniture spontaneously sliding along the floor, cutlery flying out of drawers, stale bread appearing out of thin air, etc. Several cases of this type occurred at Manning’s boarding school, and some are said to have been witnessed by more than 20 schoolboys. Manning relates that these events were quite stressful to him (no wonder…). But the problems were eventually resolved; the phenomena gradually ceased to appear, first when Manning took up automatic writing and painting, and later healing. Manning suggests that perhaps the same power that had been used to manifest as chaos now instead manifests itself harmoniously in the form of healing. For the past 30 years, Manning has enjoyed a reputation as one of the foremost healers in the world, with myriads of clients from a slew of countries. He has become an acquaintance of Prince Charles (it may not be an irrefutable proof of authenticity, but still…) and has lectured to members of the British Medical Association at their request.</p>
<p class="indent">Because of the alleged poltergeist episodes Manning was thoroughly investigated by researchers while young, in particular by George Owen (1919–2003). Owen was a mathematician and a geneticist with affiliations to the universities of Cambridge and Toronto, but in addition he was considered to be an expert on poltergeists. In the laboratory, he detected that Manning’s brain exhibited a quite unique wave pattern, with sudden bursts and unusually strong activity in the theta range. As mentioned earlier, this is in the range of 4–7 oscillations per second, which is the same range that shamans will often stimulate with their drumming. Owen assumed that Manning’s peculiar brain wave pattern was related to the poltergeist activity in some way.</p>
<p class="indent">Well, whatever explanation model one uses—spirits or psychokinesis—the experiences reported by both the personnel in Lalm kindergarten and by Manning are indeed something out of the ordinary! One is tempted, just as Flekkøy mentions in the introduction to his report, to dismiss the whole thing—which, in fact, many of the outsiders in Lalm initially did. But after a while, other people, not only the staff, started to experience the poltergeist… A parent, who initially was highly skeptical of the staff’s account, claims to have seen a marker pen, two pebbles and a plastic lid manifesting seemingly out of nowhere! We’ll give the word to this skeptic, as he is quoted in Professor Flekkøy’s report:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Right after we [the skeptic and two others] had entered the eastern part of the kindergarten’s living room, we heard a kind of snap from the ceiling. Then appeared a felt-tip pen of the sort we usually call a marker. It came at high speed from the ceiling and landed in a window facing south. The marker landed on the windowsill, and stopped as if had landed in glue. There it lay motionless. I picked it up and put it in my pocket…</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Flekkøy comments: After about two minutes in this room, they once more heard the same sound from the ceiling, and a tiny light bulb right in front of them (the light bulb was of a type not used for regular illumination but rather for decoration). Together with the light bulb a pebble landed (of the size of a thumb nail). He picked up the items, and felt that the light bulb was warm, ‘as if it just had been switched off!’ In the same room, after a short while: The same sound, and now a plastic lid landed with a certain sliding motion along the floor. In the western section of the kindergarten:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>In the same moment as we [the skeptic and the two others] entered this room, the sound came from the ceiling. Then there appeared a stone at head height that landed right before our feet. The stone had the size of the fist of a 3–4-year-old. The stone stopped right after it had landed. In the meantime another of the parents had arrived who also saw the event</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Some crazy stuff, this… Later that same evening, they heard once more the snapping sound from the ceiling, after which a toy log came down from above. Flekkøy comments dryly: ‘Interestingly enough, the concerned parent had initially been markedly critical of the veracity of the accounts of the personnel—as had most of the other men. This was rapidly and lastingly changed after the self-observation.’</p>
<p class="indent">As stated, more than 90 different, very particular episodes were reported, and several of them were more complex and multifaceted—concurrent manifestations of strange movements, sounds, smells and sensations—than those given here as brief examples. After extensive deliberations back and forth, where the six options from the introduction were considered—(a) child’s games, (b) lies, (c) psychosis, (d) delusion/mass suggestion, (e) tricks and (stage) magic, (f) the incidents witnessed by many are physically real—Flekkøy concludes mainly with the latter, namely that most of the reported episodes really (physically) happened: ‘Overall, there is a basis for assessing the observations from Lalm and equally well documented observations as being physically real.’ Flekkøy discusses possible explanations without coming down on the side of any specific one, and chooses—as is typical of sober scientists—to pass the ball on to future research. But indeed with a declared opening for new and exciting perspectives:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>the implication being that the phenomena are merited a scientific elucidation of their nature. It is highly probable that such clarification will open doors leading to a more fundamental understanding of key aspects of our own nature as well as the nature surrounding us</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Flekkøy’s exposition is called ‘Lalm kindergarten: Overview and assessment of ectopic incidents from April 26–June 15, 2010’ and the link is found at the end of this book. The report is thorough in its descriptions and discussions, and is an exciting read—highly recommended! (It will demand a little extra effort, though, as Professor Flekkøy writes in <i>Nynorsk</i>, a special branch of Norwegian, not so easily read by translation programs.)</p>
<p class="indent">If Flekkøy’s conclusion is correct, such ‘magical’ phenomena, defying ordinary human comprehension, occur not only in remote times, in distant realms or in fairy tales, nor only in the Baghdad of <i>One Thousand and One Nights</i> or at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, but also in Lalm kindergarten deep in the Gudbrandsdalen. And it came to pass in those days where Barack Obama was the emperor of the USA and Jens Stoltenberg was the governor of Norway… Who would have believed—yes, who would ever have believed?</p>
</body>
</html>