<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h99"/>Chapter 6</h2>
<h2 class="ct3">CONSCIOUSNESS—THE ENIGMATIC KEY TO THE ENIGMAS</h2>
<p class="bq"><i>How it is that anything so remarkable as a state of consciousness comes about as a result of irritating nervous tissue, is just as unaccountable as the appearance of the djinn when Aladdin rubbed his lamp in the story</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Thomas Henry Huxley</p>
<p class="noindent">The key to understanding paranormal phenomena is probably to understand a little more about what consciousness is and how it works. This is easier said than done, but we’ll give it a try. However, the intention is by no means to reveal (God forbid such arrogance!) the Mystery of Consciousness. Rather we will modestly exercise a little ‘mental chiropractic’ by cracking and kneading some very common, very rigid perceptions. This is done by introducing ideas that violate what we could call ‘the standard model’ of consciousness. This model, commonly prevalent in psychology and biology, is based on the assumptions that consciousness can be fully explained by (i.e. reduced to) physical processes in the brain, and that it only operates locally (i.e. in the head of the individual)—a plateau of understanding from which it seems difficult to say anything useful about the paranormal at all.</p>
<p class="indent">Consciousness—the term is derived from the Latin <i>con</i> (with, together) and <i>scire</i> (to know)—is in one sense the most obvious and simplest phenomenon of all: At this very moment you are probably conscious of yourself without any difficulty whatsoever. But at the same time, consciousness is a most elusive entity, ‘a ghost in the machine.’ Although consciousness is the prerequisite for all our perceptions, it cannot perceive itself—much like the hand that can so easily grasp diverse objects, but is not able to grasp itself. Art, literature, psychology and neuroscience can tell us a great deal about what is going on within our consciousness. And as life goes by, experience will inevitably teach us all a thing or two or three about the multiple and complex activities going on in our inner world. But the phenomenon of consciousness—what it is in itself—is still a complete mystery.</p>
<p class="indent">The philosopher David Chalmers has spoken of ‘the hard question’ of consciousness. This is not a question about which chemical reactions in the brain are associated with consciousness. Neither is it a question about how the outside world is ‘represented’ in our consciousness, nor is it a question about how our beliefs and ideas are formed. And finally, ‘the hard question’ has nothing whatsoever to do with the many forms of cultural and political consciousness—Western consciousness, working-class consciousness, social consciousness and the like. So what, then, is ‘the hard question’? Well, it can probably be formulated quite simply: Why does conscious experience occur at all? For perhaps we might just as well be living in a world of ‘zombies’ which by instinct perform all the actions of the average person but without consciousness, just as computers do myriads of ultra-complex calculations without having the slightest conscious experience of it. With respect to ‘the hard question’ we are, according to Chalmers, not even close to finding an answer. Yes, it seems as if many professionals hardly know where to start looking. The eminent British psychologist Stuart Sutherland writes in the <i>Macmillan Dictionary of Psychology</i>:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i><b>Consciousness</b>—The having of perceptions, thoughts, and feelings; awareness. The term is impossible to define except in terms that are unintelligible without a grasp of what consciousness means. […] Consciousness is a fascinating but elusive phenomenon: it is impossible to specify what it is, what it does, or why it has evolved. Nothing worth reading has been written on it</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">So, neither philosophy nor psychology seems to be able to provide us with an overwhelming amount of help. Our itinerary will apparently lead us through a <i>terra incognita</i>, an unmapped landscape, swampy and covered in fog, where perhaps there even be dragons… But where marshes are shrouded in veils of haze, cloudberries are often many and juicy. And if there be dragons, the treasures they guard may well be vast. So let’s just keep walking boldly ahead! I would be surprised if the fog didn’t lift a little in the course of the chapter. And even if it is not within our scope to find an answer to ‘the hard question’, we may indeed come closer to a possible explanation for some of the highly enigmatic psi phenomena.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h100"/>Consciousness—Urine of the Brain?</p>
<p class="noindent">In biology and medicine—which are strongholds of ‘the standard model’—it is sometimes claimed that consciousness is a greatly hyped and overrated entity; stated or implied, such a view is usually based on the idea that a human being is some sort of advanced, biological robot, whose actions are guided—or better still <i>controlled</i>—by a set of genetically programmed instincts and responses. Consciousness, therefore, is not free and objective, and hence cannot be trusted to give us true knowledge of ourselves and the world. Consciousness is by no means a solid anchor—nay, it could rather be described as an insignificant foam ball riding on top of the mighty waves of biology, while being swept hither and thither—like a ship without a rudder—by the indiscriminate winds of instincts and impulses. From this viewpoint consciousness is not regarded as having an independent existence, but is considered to be a mere <i>epiphenomenon</i>—a derivative phenomenon, a pure reflection of the brain’s activities. Such a view is often called <i>physicalism</i>, the essence of which was poignantly expressed by the German 19th-century zoologist Karl Vogt in his apposite words: ‘The brain produces thoughts like the kidneys produce urine.’</p>
<p class="indent">An upgraded version—perhaps we could call it BrainUrine 2.0—of this view argues that consciousness can be explained as a function of the right mix of chemical cocktails in the brain. If you blend in <i>un petit</i> amount of mirror neurons and stir 40 oscillations per second into the brain’s electrical signals, <i>voila!</i>—consciousness will be served! According to this myth, the proper arrangement of an electro-physiochemical sort will not only constitute the necessary but also sufficient conditions to explain the occurrence of consciousness. New tales of this kind are continually released—the BrainUrine 3.0 upgrade, the 4.0 upgrade, etc.—and they all in one way or another claim that neuroscience, the discipline that combines medicine, biology, physics, chemistry and psychology, has solved the mystery of consciousness. But these myths are probably just that—myths. Professor Richard Frackowiack is an internationally renowned expert for his work on brain imaging, and in 2004 he published, together with a group of experts, a classic work of more than a thousand pages, entitled <i>Human Brain Function</i>. Here he—apparently a little abashedly—confesses:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>We have no idea how consciousness emerges from the physical activity of the brain and we do not know whether consciousness can emerge from non-biological systems, such as computers […] At this point the reader will expect to find a careful and precise definition of consciousness. You will be disappointed. Consciousness has not yet become a scientific term that can be defined in this way. Currently we all use the term consciousness in many different and often ambiguous ways</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">It seems clear, then, that neuroscience c. 2004 neither had an answer to how consciousness arises, nor had any satisfactory explanation of what consciousness really is. Nevertheless, for decades it had been taken for granted within the fields of biology, psychology and psychiatry that consciousness can be fully explained as a mere reflection of activities within the brain. For, what could consciousness possibly be except that?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h101"/>Irreducible Mind</p>
<p class="bq"><i>I regard consciousness as fundamental. I regard matter as derivative from consciousness. We cannot get behind consciousness</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Max Planck, physicist, Nobel laureate</p>
<p class="noindent">In 2007, an alternative to ‘the standard model’ of consciousness was brought to the table with the release of <i>Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century</i> (E. Kelly and E. Williams Kelly, eds.), which is a very comprehensive work. The book received favorable reviews in peer-reviewed journals, such as the <i>Journal of Mind and Behavior, Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease</i> and the <i>Journal of Consciousness Studies</i>, so there is probably good reason to take its viewpoints seriously. Funnily enough, this groundbreaking work was supported financially by the comedian John Cleese of Monty Python fame, who has also, as many readers are probably aware, on a number of occasions contributed—in his distinctive way—to books on psychology.</p>
<p class="indent">The authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i> are professors and lecturers in psychology, psychiatry and neurobiology, and they believe—as the title more than indicates—that consciousness can <i>not</i> be reduced to a mere reflection of the brain’s continuous activities. Consciousness should rather, they argue, be conceived as a sphere in itself, a collectively shared field of information, with which we all (and perhaps all other living beings) are connected.</p>
<p class="indent">The authors draw on historical sources, most importantly British philosopher and poet Frederic Myers (1843–1901) and American psychologist and philosopher William James (1842–1910), with whom we became acquainted in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a>. Both Myers and James were highly skilled academics—James is sometimes referred to as the single most influential person in the history of American psychology. But in spite of their ‘scholarly squareness’ they were telling strange stories—stories that, if they are to be trusted, strongly indicate that consciousness does not always stay neatly in place inside the brain… James, as already mentioned, did research on the famed medium Leonora Piper, and found that she was able to provide tons of information which, as James saw it, would have been virtually impossible for her to obtain via any usual channel.</p>
<p class="indent">It was fascinating experiences like these that led Myers and James to become actively engaged within SPR and ASPR, and they both served as president for their respective societies. Myers was also involved in the society’s research on apparitions and crisis-telepathy, i.e. when one person experiences a crisis (shock, injury, death), the presence of this person and his/her suffering is purportedly perceived telepathically by a friend/relative. For example as in the <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a> story, where Kiss Bennett had a powerful experience of what she perceived to be the presence of the dying Roald Amundsen, contacting her by telepathy. It was, in fact, Myers who coined the very term ‘telepathy’ (<i>tele</i> = remote, <i>pathy</i> = sense, feeling, experience), and it was also he who introduced the concept of ‘ESP’ (Extra Sensory Perception).</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h102"/>The Brain as a Filter</p>
<p class="noindent">Myers advanced the interesting idea—perhaps in part based on research done by Carl Gustav Carus (the German 19th-century physician and psychologist, Goethe’s friend, mentioned in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>)—that consciousness is not <i>created</i> by the brain; rather it is <i>reduced</i> by the brain. Consciousness is basically an immense field of information, and the brain can be understood as an ultra-sophisticated filter that condenses, sorts, modulates and organizes this field. And the reason that for most of us experiences of the paranormal are not everyday occurrences is simply that our brains filter out most of these episodes! Otherwise we would be overwhelmed with all kinds of strange stuff when trying (likely unsuccessfully!) to live normal daily lives. This is, in fact, a complaint frequently heard from psychics: that their lives suffer from ‘too much information.’</p>
<p class="indent">However, in diverse altered states of consciousness the filtering can be suspended. Such states may occur e.g. during dreaming, meditation, trance, intoxication and near-death experiences. (The filtering can also be shut down by brain damage.) In line with our Internet model, such states could perhaps most aptly be described as conditions where our ‘mental firewall’ becomes partially disabled. And hence information from the Mental Internet—sometimes exciting stuff, but often just plain crap—is enabled to come through. A couple of American psychics told me that their abilities were ‘awakened’ after near-death experiences (drowning, car accident). When explained within our model, we would assume that the shock caused the ‘firewall’ to shut down, and accordingly the floodgates to the Mental Internet sprang open.</p>
<p class="indent">Such an increased flow of information happens, as already hinted at, for both better and worse: Many psychics tell about the strains and burdens that come with their visions. Norway’s most high profiled psychic, Jordalf Gjerstad, the so-called ‘Snåsa Man’, has—as mentioned in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>—been visited by literally tens of thousands of people during the past 40 years. He once told a journalist that it is a miracle he hasn’t become <i>steintoillat</i> (completely mad), as he has the perception of ‘seeing’—and thus to some extent also experiencing—his visitors’ many fears, traumas and sufferings.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h103"/>Unexplainable Phenomena</p>
<p class="noindent">In <i>Irreducible Mind</i> Myers’ and James’ central thoughts are revised and updated in the light of current research in neurobiology and quantum theory, e.g. some quite complex thoughts are included from the physicist Henry Stapp regarding the possibility and even the necessity of free will. One conundrum he tries to solve is seemingly this: If consciousness is just a one-to-one reflection of processes in the brain, how can free will be possible? Aren’t we, then, in the last resort, just biological robots fully determined by the brain’s physiochemical reactions? Hence unless the undecidedness of the quantum processes is—in one way or another—taken to be an integral part of our consciousness, then no allowance for freedom has been made. I shall not deal with the subtleties of Stapp’s model, on how we may make free choices, etc., as I believe the essence with respect to <i>our</i> theme—the collective aspect of consciousness—to be concurrent with Myers’ and James’ basic idea, namely that the brain is regarded as a <i>modulator</i> of consciousness rather than as a <i>creator</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Savantism</i>: The authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i> argue that even if neurobiology has made tremendous steps forward in recent years, there is still a plethora of phenomena that is not accounted for—and probably never <i>can</i> be accounted for—within the prevailing theories. Such phenomena include the uncanny abilities of the so-called <i>savants</i> (meaning ‘wise’ in French), those who display, for instance, extreme skills in calculation, memory, music and other fields. Many readers will probably remember the movie <i>Rain Man</i>, with Dustin Hoffman in the role of Raymond Babbitt, a mathematical savant. This character is partly based on the American Kim Peek (1951–2009), who could digest a book an hour, swallowing two pages at a time (left eye reading the left page, right eye reading the right!), and who afterwards would be able to reproduce about 98 percent of the content by heart. (This really could be named a ‘peek-experience’!) Peek reportedly—and he was thoroughly examined—‘scanned’ more than 10,000 books in this peculiar way. We are obviously not dealing here with a normal memory function; it is much closer to the scanning, uploading and downloading done by computers.</p>
<p class="indent">And then we have Daniel Tammet (<a href="http://www.danieltammet.net">http://www.danieltammet.net</a>) who, during a few weeks early in 2004, memorized pi (π, the unending number 3.141592…) to more than 22,000 places. And shortly after, on international Pi Day—which, of course, is celebrated on March 14 (3.14) —Tammet had his finest hour when reciting all these digits in public—without one single error! Tammet says he perceives the world of mathematics as a landscape where the numbers appear as forms and shapes with colors and other sensations, and also emotions, connected to them—a kind of neurological crosstalk. This mode of perception is called <i>synesthesia</i> (‘sensing together’ in Greek), and is, in fact, not unlike how some psychics experience <i>their</i> inner landscapes. A lady experienced within the field of psychic perception told me that all her senses work together as a whole, and that she will therefore often not be able to distinguish which of the senses is supplying her with the information. Incidentally, it may appear that a person has <i>both</i> these skills, both synesthesia and psychic perception. For example, reliable reports suggest that Mlle Lenormand and Marcello Haugen, both mentioned in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>, had photographic, savant memory. And anecdotes indicate that Kim Peek also had some telepathic abilities.</p>
<p class="indent">So, when Tammet wants to memorize thousands of digits, or do some crazy calculation stunt at about the same speed as a computer, he just mentally strolls around in this inner, synesthetical landscape and describes what he sees and feels—no big deal, really! Tammet, who has unusually good communicative skills for a savant (savants are often markedly introvert and not that verbal), has published several works of his own, and has also written a foreword to the savant book <i>Islands of Genius</i> by psychiatrist D.A. Treffert, who was used as a consultant by the team who made <i>Rain Man</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">According to the authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i>, the incredible skills of Peek, Tammet and other savants are neither explained nor explainable by the prevalent theories of ‘memory traces’ in the brain or the like. But if one flips over the perspective and views the brain as a filter modulating and organizing the vast information in the Irreducible Mind (the collective Consciousness, the Mental Internet), well, then the skills of savants suddenly seem easier to explain. And if this is so, perhaps we are all dormant savants. One out of several examples indicating this could be the case is Orlando Serrell (<a href="http://www.orlandoserrell.com/about.htm">http://www.orlandoserrell.com/about.htm</a>). Orlando was a completely average child until, on August 17, 1979 at the age of 10, he was hit hard with a baseball on the left side of his head; this resulted in a brain injury that apparently caused parts of his filtering apparatus to cease to function. For subsequently he has been able to ‘flash-calculate’ the weekday of any date in the calendar, and he is also able to recall the weather conditions in his hometown on every single day since that fateful event back in 1979. This means being able to remember the weather on more than 9,000 separate days—utterly amazing, I must say!</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Out-of-body experiences</i>: Another phenomenon that seems difficult to explain within the framework of ‘the standard model’ of consciousness are the near-death cases where patients, after being resuscitated, are able to describe what happened while they were comatose. A classic case was related by heart surgeon Michael Sabom: A patient with cardiac arrest described how during the operation he had soared out of his body and calmly viewed the whole scenario from above. Then he lowered himself down over the operating table—where he could see himself lying! So far his experience could easily be dismissed as no more than a fantasy. But it turned out that he was able to provide a quite detailed account—not just a general description—of the procedures the surgeons had followed. He could also describe the movements of some of the surgical instruments at a time when he was demonstrably in a deep coma. So how could this be if consciousness is just a reflection of processes in the brain?</p>
<p class="indent">There are dozens of reports of similar incidents, which—if described in classical occult terms—could be called ‘spontaneous astral projections.’ My favorite example of this phenomenon is the experience related by the renowned Irish occultist and writer Herbie Brennan which can be found at: <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O6zHbeMhuRA">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O6zHbeMhuRA</a></p>
<p class="indent">Based on such findings, British near-death specialist Dr Sam Parnia in 2008 launched a project called AWARE (AWAreness during REsuscitation). It started out with 15 hospitals agreeing to map occurrences of this and related kinds. The project is described in Dr Parnia’s book <i>The Lazarus Effect: The Science That is Rewriting the Boundaries Between Life and Death</i>. The results so far have not been quite as exciting as some of the researchers had expected (and probably also hoped for). There were only two apparently inexplicable cases, where the patients’ consciousness seemingly was working and could observe the scene from the outside while the patient was in a coma. And due to ill-health only one of these patients could be interviewed strictly according to protocol. Thus the project documented only one case with ‘a verifiable period of conscious awareness during which time cerebral function was not expected,’ in the technical words of Parnia et al.</p>
<p class="indent">But perhaps even this somewhat meager result could corroborate an expanded view on consciousness? For as William James once said: ‘If you wish to upset the law that all crows are black, you mustn’t seek to show that no crows are; it is enough if you prove one single crow to be white.’ Parnia’s comments in the wake of the project have sounded affirmative with respect to this, whereas the comments by a number of skeptics have not (why am I not surprised?). Anyway, it should be noted that the project led by Parnia looked at cases in connection with cardiac arrest. There is also research (by Dr Pim van Lommel and others) with other criteria and which apparently confirms ‘non-physical veridical perceptions.’</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Other enigmas</i>: There are still more phenomena which, according to the authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i>, are difficult to explain within the horizon of ‘the standard model.’ We have for instance those thousands of people who have reported ‘reincarnation memories’—i.e. a person presents (verifiable) memories, sometimes with detailed life histories, internal family affairs, secret episodes, etc., that appear to originate from a completely different life. Even the famed astrophysicist and high-profiled skeptic Carl Sagan was puzzled by this phenomenon, and thought that it merited serious investigation. But even if such memories should prove to be accurate, it does not mean that they are to be explained by reincarnation; from our perspective such memories could have been downloaded from the Mental Internet.</p>
<p class="indent">Other conundrums are those special people who have so-called <i>multiple personalities</i>, and where apparently totally distinct personalities live side by side within the same person. And last but not least of the enigmas—and of course of special interest to us!—we have the psychics and the various psi phenomena, such as telepathy, clairvoyance, precognition, healing and so on.</p>
<p class="indent">The authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i> present their material over more than 800 closely written pages with a wealth of references. Thus the book constitutes a valuable documentation of psychological <i>anomalies</i> (<i>a</i> = not, <i>nomos</i> = law, rule), i.e. irregularities, events, occurrences which do not fit well with prevailing theories, or with the ruling <i>paradigm</i>, as it was famously termed by the historian of science, Thomas Kuhn. And—as Kuhn has described in his classic <i>The Structure of Scientific Revolutions</i>—since the anomalies are ‘misfits,’ they are mostly unwelcome and tend to be forgotten, bypassed or even outright embezzled by the scientific community. And to the degree that they are recognized at all, anomalies will typically be assigned to a lowly footnote, with the implied message: ‘Does not fit with our cherished theory—are probably unimportant!’</p>
<p class="indent">The anomalies will therefore remain largely unexplained—to both the scientists’ astonishment and (mainly) annoyance. But, as we have heard, the authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i> believe that many anomalies within psychology can be explained with a ‘change of paradigm’ (Kuhn), if we start to view consciousness as a collective field of information. This field is the habitat of all the myriads of information that savants are able to remember; here is stored all the knowledge that psychics download; here are preserved the memories and experiences of the people who have lived before us; and here we all continually exchange ‘telepathic emails’ with friends and family. The brain is the device that enables us to connect to, upload, download and sort material from this sphere of information; however, the two—the brain and the Irreducible Mind—are most definitely not identical. Let’s again apply our simple model: My computer is what enables me to connect to, download and sort all kinds of material from the internet. But the internet is obviously not identical to my computer!</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Irreducible Mind</i> currently represents one of the best scientifically substantiated alternatives to ‘the standard model’ regarding the nature of consciousness. But it is by no means the first work where ideas of this kind have been promoted. As we heard, <i>Irreducible Mind</i> is to some degree built on William James’ and—in particular—Frederick Myers’ thoughts. And as we pointed out in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a>, the great Swiss psychiatrist C.G. Jung also espoused the idea that the psyche has a collective dimension, ‘the collective unconscious’—as he labeled it. Jung considered—at least in some of his works—this sphere to be almost a parallel universe. If we now expand our perspectives, both historically and philosophically, we find that various eminent thinkers of earlier times, such as Spinoza, Leibniz and Berkeley, go even further in emphasizing the preeminent position of consciousness. For not only do they conceive consciousness to be independent of matter, they—a bit simplified—even assume that the universe and all that it contains in the last resort are manifestations of a larger Consciousness (sometimes just referred to as ‘God’).</p>
<p class="indent">This view of the world, where everything is seen as filled with (and possibly created by) consciousness/spirit/psyche, is referred to as <i>panpsychism</i> (the prefix ‘pan’ meaning ‘all’). Panpsychism was the prevalent philosophy in German Idealism, the Romantic movement we had a look at in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>, where poets and thinkers such as Goethe, Novalis, Hegel, Fichte, Schelling and Schopenhauer were important figures. Now, if one assumes that consciousness permeates into the core of everything, then all humans, animals and plants, yes, in fact all that exists, <i>is already</i> intrinsically and intimately tangled together. Hence it hardly seems like a great stretch to take paranormal transference phenomena such as telepathy and clairvoyance into account. And—as we saw in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>—the most influential thinkers within German idealism indeed considered psi phenomena to be objectively real and not just chimeras.</p>
<p class="indent">So, clearly the authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i> are by no means alone in their highlighting of consciousness; rather they can be seen as representatives of a long and proud tradition of thinking.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h104"/>Other Models</p>
<p class="noindent">However, their model of consciousness is not necessarily the best alternative to ‘the standard model.’ There are also other models that allow for psi—I will briefly present some of these below.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The OrchOR</i>: OrchOR is shorthand for Orchestrated Objective Reduction (a somewhat confusing name… I’ll explain below). The main ideas in this model were launched in the late 1980s by the American anesthesiologist Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose—a mathematical physicist and colleague of Stephen Hawking. The model was then developed in Penrose’s book <i>Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness</i> (1994). Hameroff and Penrose believe that consciousness emanates in the brain as a result of ‘bio-molecular computing’—complex quantum processes (please don’t ask!) taking place in the <i>microtubules</i>, a plethora of tiny ‘pipes’ within the brain. Whereas quantum waves which, according to Hameroff and Penrose, can create consciousness when they ‘collapse’ (= get a specific structure), are ubiquitous. The Hameroff and Penrose model is therefore sometimes seen as a scientific ‘light-version’ of <i>panpsychism</i>, where consciousness is thought to be ubiquitous. Hameroff has in this connection stated: ‘I disagree only slightly. I would say that what is omnipresent in the universe is proto-consciousness.’</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps the rather abstract idea of an omnipresent ‘proto-consciousness’ that gives rise to consciousness could best be illustrated by how <i>electricity</i> emanates in batteries based on <i>electromagnetism</i> being present in every atom in the universe. Or with another image: Hameroff has said that proto-consciousness is to consciousness what noise is to music. Both noise and music consist of <i>sounds</i> (which therefore perhaps could be called ‘proto-music’). But in noise the sounds are not organized, whereas in music the sounds are structured in a harmonious way—they are ‘orchestrated.’ This, then, is the reason why the word ‘Orchestrated’ is embedded in the model’s name. Whereas ‘Objective Reduction’ refers to the quantum waves being ‘reduced’ by our brains, giving them ‘objective’ structure in the form of consciousness.</p>
<p class="indent">Hameroff has said he thinks their model allows for telepathy, based on the idea of <i>quantum non-locality</i>, an exciting concept that we will discuss later in this chapter. And Penrose has stated: ‘I think there is strong evidence for precognition but I haven’t done the maths yet to work out what else is allowed,’ i.e. what other psi phenomena their model eventually opens up to.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The World as a Hologram</i>: Yet another model that has ample space for psi stems from the great American physicist David Bohm (in his youth a colleague of Einstein) and the American neuropsychologist and neurophysicist Karl Pribram. This model is very complex, but is presented in an accessible way in the books of Michael Talbot—an author who had various paranormal experiences, including poltergeist and astral projection (out-of-body experiences), which gave him the urge to explore other, more inclusive models of consciousness. In Bohm’s model consciousness and matter are not thought to be opposites (and one has to admit that they cooperate fairly well inside most human beings!) and both are seen as manifestations of an underlying ‘holomovement.’ Bohm believes that the world can be described as a <i>hologram</i>, a sort of three-dimensional image, where every little part contains information about the whole: ‘The droplet reflects the universe’ would probably be an apt expression for this idea. Hence our consciousness will in some sense be ‘reflected’ throughout the whole hologram, and is therefore not confined to the inside of our own heads.</p>
<p class="indent">If consciousness and matter really are as closely interconnected as Bohm suggests, the occurrence of psi phenomena such as telepathy and clairvoyance—which violates our common-sense idea about Space—would no longer seem strange. Bohm has explicitly stated that the common notion of consciousness suffers from not having included the revelations presented by modern physics. And he also participated several times in parapsychological experiments. After quite a few years on the margins, Bohm’s interpretation of quantum physics has recently seen a partial renaissance because of an experiment conducted under the auspices of the physicist Aephraim M. Steinberg at the University of Toronto in 2016. The bibliography has a link to an article from the <i>New Scientist</i> describing this experiment. More recent experiments are being conducted at University College London.</p>
<p class="indent">Maybe Bohm’s model could be even better suited than <i>Irreducible Mind</i> to explain clairvoyance? For, if a clairvoyant person is able to describe a specific building in a faraway country, one might imagine that this was possible because the natives of the country had ‘uploaded’ (i.e. by means of their thoughts, feelings and experiences) information about this building to the Mental Internet. Hence the information would be universally accessible, and could be ‘downloaded’ by the clairvoyant. But, if the clairvoyant could describe specific conditions on another planet, where there had never been a single human to ‘upload’ information—well, then it would be harder to see how such a feat could be possible. Nevertheless, it appears that Ingo Swann, one of the most important remote viewers in the Stargate project (<a href="07_chapter02.xhtml">chapter 2</a>) managed to do just that. In a recorded session on the evening of April 27, 1973 Swann stated that he could ‘see’ there were planetary rings around Jupiter (much as with Saturn). This was a highly controversial claim at the time. But—in 1979 the <i>Voyager</i> probe confirmed that there <i>are</i> in fact such rings around Jupiter!</p>
<p class="indent">According to Bohm’s model, our consciousness participates in the whole hologram (the whole world) at all times—‘the droplet reflects the universe’—and it is therefore not separate from any place, even if the place is abandoned by both God and humans, and even if it is in another part of the universe. So could it perhaps be precisely such a Bohmian ‘holographic ubiquity’ of consciousness that enables clairvoyance to exist?</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The Zero Point Field</i>: And there are still more models (whew!—this will be the last one for now, I promise) such as the Hungarian systems philosopher Ervin Laszlo’s exciting ‘Integral Theory of Everything.’ Laszlo’s model is based on the idea of a <i>zero point field</i>. He often refers to this field with the old Sanskrit word <i>akasha</i>, which—among other things—denotes <i>ether</i>. In ancient Indian philosophy ether was considered to be the fundamental element (in Theosophy, ‘the akasha chronicles’ refers to a cosmic archive). Laszlo’s zero point field purportedly contains every piece of information both thinkable and unthinkable—e.g. the totality of individual and collective memory, all the genetic codes in nature, all future possibilities, etc.—not just in our present universe, but in the <i>Metaverse</i>. In Laszlo’s system the Metaverse comprises all past, present and future universes and all possible parallel dimensions. The <i>zero point field</i> could therefore be seen as an infinitely upgraded version of the Mental Internet!</p>
<p class="indent">To delve into the different models is demanding, and to determine which—if any—is correct is obviously even more difficult. Here is clearly material for a string of Nobel prizes for those with the vocation. These models are, as said at the beginning of the chapter, presented here mainly for ‘chiropractic reasons’—to crack and knead some rigid perceptions by showing that there are, in fact, legitimate alternatives to the view of ‘the standard model.’ This model seems to rule out psi phenomena from the outset whereas the alternative models presented can quite comfortably include them. If we are not to believe that the millions of people who, according to statistics, have experienced such phenomena are naive, dishonest or flat-out crazy, perhaps we should seriously consider a new and more inclusive model of what consciousness is and how it works?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h105"/>Eastern Perspectives</p>
<p class="noindent">Eastern philosophies have in the main included the various types of psi phenomena. This is linked to the holistic approach prevalent in both Chinese and Indian thought. Many readers probably know of <i>Taoism</i> (<i>tao</i> is often translated as ‘way,’ ‘mode,’ ‘law of life,’ etc., referring to nature’s intrinsic harmony). The key concepts here are <i>yin</i> and <i>yang</i>, which represent the eternal counterpoints that complement and interact with each other within life’s great symphony: passivity/activity, contraction/expansion, night/day, death/life, etc. The symbol of Taoism, which is often depicted on jewelry of the ‘hippie kind,’ is two drop-shaped figures, one black and one white, inscribed in a circle. This expresses that opposites are closely interlinked with one other, and are involved in continuous exchanges. The person who cooperates with this flux—often referred to as <i>the supreme person</i>—through the attentive and meditative attitude called <i>Wu Wei</i> (effortless action, active non-action), will, according to tradition, elevate his/her consciousness and gain control over the <i>chi</i>, the life force, and hence will be able to perform healing, telekinesis and other ‘miracles’ (which are taken to be the natural activities of an expanded consciousness). The central text in Taoism, the <i>Tao Te Ching</i> from around 600 <small>BCE</small>, also describes the strong telepathic influence exerted by the person who is in harmony with <i>tao</i> and has an expanded consciousness: ‘When the right person is sitting at the right place and is thinking the right thoughts, it can be felt more than a thousand miles away!’</p>
<p class="indent">Within the Indian tradition the holistic mindset is beautifully expressed by the metaphor of the Net of Indra, the God-King. Imagine an infinitely large golden fishing net with lots of parallel layers where each node in the yarn is a facet-cut jewel, and in its facets every jewel reflects the entire net with all the other jewels. This symbolizes how absolutely all things, objects and entities in the whole wide world—consciousness and nature, humans and gods, galaxies and grains of sand—are connected to each other and interact through myriads and myriads of relationships. In most branches of Buddhism and Hinduism consciousness is thought to be the driving force in these exchanges, while matter is on a lower level; it is sometimes conceived to be a kind of ‘frozen’ consciousness—approximately as ice is frozen water. The person who through yoga and meditation acquires control of his/her consciousness will therefore—according to the theory—be less enslaved by material restrictions than ordinary people. This is elaborated on in the 196 classic yoga sutras (aphorisms) compiled around 400 <small>CE</small> by the philosopher Patanjali. Here we are instructed in techniques for developing <i>siddhis</i>, i.e. paranormal abilities. The treatise explains how one can achieve knowledge of past and future events, knowledge of what is hidden and remote, knowledge of other people’s thoughts, how to perform levitation, and other extraordinary skills. We immediately recognize that these are abilities of the psi-type, which in parapsychology would be referred to respectively as post- and precognition, clairvoyance, telepathy and psychokinesis.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h106"/>Eastern Wisdom and Western Science—Flux and Consciousness as Common Denominators</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h107"/><i>The Tao of Physics</i></p>
<p class="noindent">There have been several attempts to combine Eastern wisdom and Western science; one of the most successful syntheses can be found in the popular science bestseller <i>The Tao of Physics</i> (1975) by nuclear physicist Fritjof Capra. He believes that essential insights, which were perceived intuitively in the ancient Eastern wisdom traditions, have in modern times been formulated intellectually in Western quantum physics. One common denominator could then be the notion of nature being essentially a stream, a flux (as in Taoism)—another could be the idea that consciousness is essential, yes perhaps even the basic ‘stuff’ of the universe (as in Hinduism and Buddhism).</p>
<p class="indent">But—as once was said by Jesus: ‘A prophet is only without honor in his own country, among his own relations and in his own house.’ Many (most) physicists thought (and still think) that quantum physics primarily should be understood and used as a set of mathematical models. These models work very well when performing calculations at the subatomic level (particles smaller than atoms), but they, it is often claimed, are of little or no value in describing our everyday world. So—in addition to his great success, Capra has also taken a brutal beating. This is partly because the special branch of quantum theory he adhered to, the so-called ‘bootstrap’ theory, quite quickly fell out of fashion, but first and foremost his critics argue that he blends physics and philosophy in an unsustainable manner.</p>
<p class="indent">Would it be better, then, if our friend (or fiend?) Capra had kept mum, stayed in his laboratory, and left the philosophy to the philosophers? Well, everyone is entitled to their opinion, but I think it should be noted that some of the greats within quantum physics—Werner Heisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger, Wolfgang Pauli, Niels Bohr, etc.—had distinct philosophical leanings; they weren’t afraid to make bold speculations, and were not the least shy in bringing Eastern mysticism into the picture. Bohr even used the symbols of <i>yin</i> and <i>yang</i> in his personal coat of arms and on his gravestone. And before publishing his book Capra had, in fact, presented his manuscript to Heisenberg, who had apparently approved of the basic tenets.</p>
<p class="indent">Anyway, the <i>Zeitgeist</i> was obviously hungry for Capra’s <i>cuisine</i>, and <i>The Tao of Physics</i> has for four decades been the most popular quantum course in popular culture with a digestible diet of what, in a slightly derogatory way, is often called <i>quantum mysticism</i>—the combination of quantum physics, philosophy, spirituality and consciousness theory. Capra’s legacy has in our time, for better or worse, been passed on to many others. One of the books that can be considered both popular and serious is <i>The Non-Local Universe: The New Physics and Matters of the Mind</i> by Robert Nadeau and Menas Kafatos (2001).</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h108"/>The World as Flux</p>
<p class="noindent">Now, one possible meeting point between quantum physics and Eastern mysticism is the notion that basically the world has a ‘liquid’ nature; if so, the difference between matter and consciousness would not be as insuperable as is held by common sense. David Bohm once stated that matter has a ‘mind-like quality.’ And even if quantum physics is a patchwork of models and interpretations that sometimes complement, sometimes contradict each other, there is the consistent assumption that at the subatomic level the world is not at all as firm and solid as our everyday experience would suggest. On the contrary, ‘down there’ the world can rather be described as a cascading mass of elementary particles and wave patterns—‘quantum foam,’ as it was famously dubbed by the ‘physicists’ physicist’ John Wheeler, who has also coined the well-known concepts ‘black hole’ and ‘wormhole.’ Yes, one may even consider the particles to be statistical probabilities rather than existing entities, and they will therefore sometimes be referred to as <i>possible</i> particles! So—within modern quantum physics the rock-solid atoms (‘atom’ means ‘indivisible’ in Greek) of classical physics have been replaced with ‘building blocks’ which are highly unstable and fluid—just as unstable and fluid as the ever-changing yin and yang of Taoism!</p>
<p class="indent">Maybe this constant state of flux, this ‘mind-like quality’ of matter, is what conceivably could enable psychokinetic phenomena, e.g. metal bending with the power of thought, for which those such as Uri Geller—rightfully, or perhaps not—became world famous. Physicist John Hasted, former head of research at Birkbeck College, University of London, thought this to be the case. In his book <i>The Metal Benders</i>, Hasted has presented many laboratory experiments where mental metal bending allegedly took place under tightly controlled conditions. This uncanny phenomenon is reported to have occurred even when the test subjects were not able to touch the metal at all, e.g. the objects were placed inside sealed glass bottles; this seems to reduce the possibility that the effect was due to cheating. In his own experiments, Hasted for the most part used ordinary people—often children—as test subjects, and not professional mediums or psychics (who may be wolves in sheep’s clothing—cheaters or magicians). Hasted eventually became fully convinced that mental metal bending was for real; nevertheless, he was frustrated with his research since he failed to provide a satisfactory theoretical explanation for the phenomenon.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h109"/>Consciousness in Charge</p>
<p class="noindent">Another possible tangential point between quantum physics and Eastern mysticism is, as we have already heard, the preeminent role assigned to consciousness. In some interpretations of quantum physics the observer/consciousness is seen almost as a co-creator of the world. I’ll try to explain: It is thought that the world takes shape when the ‘potentials are realized’ by conscious observation. Etymologically ‘realize’ stems from Latin: <i>res</i> = ‘thing, event, deed, fact,’ and to ‘realize’ something basically means to bring it into existence. Many readers will probably know about the mysterious double nature of light. In one experimental setup a beam of light will emerge as waves, while in another setup it will appear as particles! These two different embodiments of the beam—waves, particles—are just <i>possibilities</i> until the observer during the experiment <i>realizes</i> one of them. There are several interpretations of this highly puzzling phenomenon—one is that the observer by his/her conscious observation virtually <i>creates</i> the light beam into becoming either waves or particles. These, I’ll have to admit, are not easily accessible matters; I take refuge in the words of physics genius and Nobel laureate Richard Feynman, who has stated that ‘anyone who claims to understand quantum theory, is either lying or crazy.’</p>
<p class="indent">Some physicists take the extreme view of the role of the observer/consciousness, and claim that if there is no observer to ‘collapse the wave function’ and ‘realize the potential,’ then the world simply cannot become manifest, cannot become existent! Based on this idea, the physicist and Nobel laureate Eugene Wigner theorized that there must be some kind of omnipresent Consciousness in the universe—a Consciousness that observes, and thus manifests the world.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h110"/>Vedanta—Wisdom from Ancient India</p>
<p class="noindent">Wigner found support for his idea of such an omnipresent Consciousness in the old Indian philosophy called <i>Vedanta</i> (<i>veda</i> means ‘knowledge, understanding’ in Sanskrit). Here there is a clear parallel to <i>panpsychism</i>, as discussed above, where the whole world is seen as imbued with psyche/consciousness. And from the perspective of the history of ideas it is, in fact, thought that the <i>fons et origo</i>, the original source, of panpsychism, via a complex history, can perhaps be found in Vedanta. The possible lineage could be as follows.</p>
<p class="indent">There were trade and other exchanges between India and Greece in antiquity, both under Persian rule and increasingly so under Alexander the Great (who during his Indian campaign happened to be joined by Pyrrho, later the founder of skepticism). Via this barter—some historians argue—Vedic philosophy may have infused Greek thought, e.g. the ideas about reincarnation found in Pythagorism and Platonism. Later, Vedic influence may have seeped into the European stock of ideas via Stoic speculations about the <i>Logos</i>—the creative Reason, the Divine Word, thought to be omnipresent. This composite baton was in the next leg passed on to Christianity, which can be seen in the famous beginning of the Gospel of John, ‘In the beginning was the Word/Logos,’ where the <i>Logos</i> is identified with Christ. There was also a parallel current in Neo-Platonism and Alchemy, with their ideas of the <i>anima mundi</i>, the omnipresent World Soul.</p>
<p class="indent">And ‘the same old story’ seems to continue: Vedanta, with its ubiquitous Consciousness, became a valuable inspiration for Erwin Schrödinger, a preeminent pioneer in quantum physics. To his friends Schrödinger often quoted in Sanskrit from the Upanishads, the sacred texts that Vedanta is based on. And based on Vedanta, Schrödinger conceived consciousness to be a <i>first fact</i>—a ‘building block’ of existence, something having <i>perseity</i>, meaning that it exists in and by itself. He therefore did not think that consciousness could be reduced to brain chemistry. And he meant this irreducibility did not only apply to the <i>existence</i> of consciousness but also to its qualitative aspects:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>The sensation of color cannot be accounted for by the physicist’s objective picture of light waves. Could the physiologist account for it, if he had fuller knowledge than he has of the processes in the retina and the nervous processes set up by them in the optical nerve bundles and in the brain? I do not think so</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">According to Vedanta there is basically just <i>one</i> consciousness. One of the images used to illustrate this is a cut crystal. In its facets it reflects the world in many different ways, yet it is still the same crystal. In keeping with this an individual’s consciousness is taken to be an expression of the great Consciousness, much like—to use another image—a vortex in a river is basically an expression of the river, and does not have a separate existence. Schrödinger says: ‘Vedanta teaches that consciousness is one, all events are played out within a universal consciousness, and there is no diversity of “selves.”’ So, this means that both Jack’s consciousness and Jill’s consciousness, my consciousness and your consciousness, are basically one and the same; we all participate in the one, collective, cosmic Consciousness. And if so, the simple model of consciousness we have proposed in this book—of a Mental Internet in which the separate computers are linked together—seems to fit in perfectly (how very convenient!).</p>
<p class="indent">Vedanta also advocates that consciousness reveals itself in many places in nature, not unlike the way (to again use this more modern image) electricity emanates in different types of batteries. Schrödinger has in accord with this argued that even simple organisms, such as earthworms, have consciousness, or, better, <i>participate</i> in consciousness, to the degree to which their nervous systems allow. Even if Schrödinger can sound like an ardent New Ager, he seems to have been completely uninterested in whether or not this collective Consciousness enables psi phenomena (and he has argued explicitly against reincarnation). Conversely, a great contemporary physicist, Cambridge professor and Nobel laureate Brian Josephson—also inspired by Vedanta—has long been a warm proponent of the psi hypothesis. Josephson seems to have taken a special interest in telepathy and psychokinesis—phenomena he even claims to have had convincingly demonstrated!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h111"/>The Perennial Philosophy</p>
<p class="noindent">An influential proponent for the unification of Eastern and Western thought, who probably is more accessible than the great physicists, is the British author Aldous Huxley (1894–1963). Within fiction he is world-famous for the humorous/dystopian novel <i>Brave New World</i>, and in philosophy/religion he contributed with the long-term bestseller <i>The Perennial Philosophy</i>. This is a highly influential anthology where Huxley, through a wealth of quotes with accompanying comments, promotes what he conceives to be the essence of both Eastern and Western mystical traditions—an essence which perhaps could be summed up as: the experience of unity with the Divine, the imperative of Love, and openness toward the Miraculous. Huxley had a long-lasting apprenticeship with the Indian guru Swami Prabhavananda; he practiced meditation and wrote well over 40 articles about Vedanta.</p>
<p class="indent">Huxley was concerned with understanding how consciousness works, and to a certain extent parapsychology. In his famous essay <i>The Doors of Perception</i>, Huxley describes a medically controlled experience with the consciousness-expanding drug <i>mescaline</i>. The title of the essay is, as many probably know, taken from <i>The Marriage of Heaven and Hell</i>, a series of texts by the great English mystic William Blake, where one of the lines reads: ‘If the doors of perception were cleansed, everything would appear to man as it is, infinite.’ This line is also the ultimate source for the name of the cult band The Doors. If the mental rust is blown out of the pipes, Huxley suggests, we will have access to the <i>Mind at Large</i> where vast amounts of information is stored—yes, when we are in contact with this sphere, we will be virtually omniscient (like one occasionally can feel when browsing the Internet). Huxley sums up his view with a quote from the philosopher C.D. Broad:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Each person is at each moment capable of remembering all that has ever happened to him and of perceiving everything that is happening everywhere in the universe. The function of the brain and nervous system is to protect us from being overwhelmed and confused by this mass of largely useless and irrelevant knowledge, by shutting out most of what we should otherwise perceive or remember at any moment, and leaving only that very small and special selection which is likely to be practically useful</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Huxley thus promotes a vision, based on both Eastern and Western sources, which matches splendidly with the view promoted by <i>Irreducible Mind</i> (which is not surprising, as Frederick Myers—among others—was a common source for both), namely that our everyday experience of the world is based on a constriction, a limitation, a filtered selection of reality that the brain arranges for us. But—maybe not all of us filter out to the same degree? Perhaps there are some who in a natural way, without the potentially dangerous influence of mescaline and other psychoactive substances (an artificial weakening of the filtration can sometimes cause the mental fuses to blow), slip through larger amounts of information from the <i>Mind at Large</i>? And perhaps such people are not only to be found in the secluded monasteries of the Himalayas, or in the mythological mountains of Shambala, but can also be strolling around freely in our own neighborhood? There are, as we soon shall see, good reasons to believe that this is precisely the case!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h112"/>From the Himalayas to Hallingdal, from Shambala to Snåsa—Space Has No Limits</p>
<p class="noindent">This chapter opened with a quote by the prominent biologist Thomas Huxley, grandfather of Aldous, where he used the jinni (‘jinni’ is the correct—singular—form, whereas ‘jinn’ is plural) in Aladdin’s lamp to illustrate the enigma of consciousness. If we now expand this image a little further, we’ll remember that one of the properties of this jinni is that it stands outside of the normal spatial limitations. It will in an instant have moved anywhere, there to fetch slaves and camels, silk and khadi, gold and precious stones, perfumes and delectable dishes and everything else that Aladdin’s heart should desire. So, even if the jinni (probably for some unknown practical purpose) resides inside the lamp, it is not bound to any specific place, rather it could be described as being <i>non-local</i>, as it is often dubbed.</p>
<p class="indent">As we will now illustrate, both with examples and with experiments, it can seem as if non-locality is a feature not only of Aladdin’s, but also of <i>our</i> jinni, i.e. our consciousness. And even if it does not always provide us with the amount of gold and precious stones allotted to Aladdin, it nevertheless allows us to acquire treasures unearthed by the Himalayan sages—jewels of wisdom polished by tradition and given a final luster by writers such as Aldous Huxley. Bringing with us a little of this wealth we now mount our flying carpet and whizz telekinetically back to the shores of home. (The stories about ‘flying carpets’ are based on out-of-body experiences that happened when Sufis, Islamic mystics, were sitting in deep meditation on their prayer rugs.)</p>
<p class="indent">Our first stop is in Hallingdal in Norway—the home of Ivar Flatmo, who was one of the most well-known psychics in Norway until, in 1988, he died under ugly circumstances (stabbed to death in his own home). Flatmo certainly seems to have been a exceptional man: Many have told of how he would describe the interior of their homes where he had never set foot, and also of how, based on his alleged clairvoyance, he succeeded in recovering wedding rings, jewelry and other valuables that had been lost or misplaced. There are also quite a few stories of how Flatmo—sitting in his living room—was able to locate animals lost in the forest. (Flatmo lived in a rural area and local farmers often asked him for help with matters of this kind.)</p>
<p class="indent">Flatmo was artistically gifted but socially inept, and periodically he was also given to alcohol, to some extent because his psychic visions imposed a heavy burden on him. When performing daily tasks as, say, going to the store, he would sometimes ‘see’ the shape of a sideways figure eight (a symbol of infinity) on the back of another customer. In Flatmo’s experience this vision of an eight would announce the impending death of the person concerned—obviously not a sight suited to please! Flatmo also had a terrifying vision of the dramatic events on January 28, 1986, when the space shuttle <i>Challenger</i> exploded in the air and the entire crew perished. Regardless of how one would explain such an experience—clairvoyance or hallucination—it certainly must have been a most jarring sight for the highly sensitive Flatmo.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite his many personal difficulties Flatmo was usually accommodating when people asked for his assistance. Even the Red Cross and the police consulted him from time to time. Once he was asked to help find a person who had drowned. Kjell Askildt at the Hol police station (who later became quite influential in the force, and published a book about his career) relates that when Flatmo appeared at the lake he immediately pointed out where he felt the dead person was lying. Then he went out in a boat together with the search crew and told them where to lower the underwater camera—and the camera bumped right into the corpse! Flatmo subsequently went on to locate the boots and other articles belonging to the deceased. Kjell Askildt summarizes: ‘I am convinced of Ivar Flatmo’s ability to find missing things and people. His visions were not always correct—there may be many reasons for that. But both I and others in my department have benefited from the information Flatmo was able to obtain.’</p>
<p class="indent">Similar abilities are also ascribed to ‘celebrity-psychics’ such as Anna Elisabeth Westerlund (1907–1995). She had a regular column in a women’s magazine and has published several books. In one of them—one that has the almost <i>too</i> telling title <i>I Found the Corpse</i>—she reprinted letters from both private persons and public officials confirming that she had located their lost relatives and other persons. And likewise, Joralf Gjerstad, the ‘Snåsa Man’—depicted in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>—has been credited with a number of such feats. In 2010 Gjerstad successfully assisted in finding a person who was missing after a snowslide tragedy (two other persons had, by then, already been found dead). The avalanche expert Oddgeir Johansen’s report, which was published with the consent of the relatives of the deceased, was reprinted in several newspapers, including the main journals <i>Aftenposten</i> and <i>Dagbladet</i>. Johansen contacted the Snåsa Man by phone, and was asked to imagine the site of the accident. Johansen relates what then happened:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>He [the Snåsa Man] explained that he was now able to see the place and asked me to turn my head to the North. He could then describe the terrain down to the smallest detail, the surrounding mountains and how the slide looked. He then (correctly) indicated the area where the last of the deceased was. I cannot imagine he would have any qualifications to describe the place as precisely as he did, says Johansen. […] We had already decided to search in that particular area. It was one of the primary sectors. But what was surprising was the description he gave of the terrain and the conditions, because it matched so incredibly well. He had never been in the area and had little prerequisite for knowing it […] I’ll just have to bow, and I think that there are some who see more than others see […]. (Dagbladet, online version, May 29, 2010. Link to the article can be found in the bibliography.)</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">If we are not to believe that the many reliable people who relate such stories—private persons, police officers, avalanche experts, etc.—for some strange reason should be fibbers in disguise, it raises the question: Perhaps people such as Flatmo, Westerlund and the Snåsa Man have fewer filters in relation to the overwhelming bulk of information which according to both <i>Irreducible Mind</i>, Huxley and Vedanta lies in the <i>Mind at Large</i>? And that they, after having learned how to relate to this chaotic material, in fact have become ‘capable of remembering all that has ever happened […] and of perceiving everything that is happening everywhere in the universe.’ Or, as we describe it in step with our more modern model: Perhaps such people have a somewhat lower firewall and are kitted out with a somewhat better search engine on the Mental Internet?</p>
<p class="indent">Well, whatever descriptions one should find fitting, both in the East and in the West, in the wisdom traditions and in science, from the laboratory and from the field, there are literally countless reports about phenomena that seem to demolish ‘the standard model,’ where consciousness is conceived to be ‘brain urine,’ a mere byproduct of processes in the brain. It could therefore be due time to consider more inclusive and fruitful models that have ample space for the full grandeur of our consciousness. Because just as Aladdin’s jinni cannot unfold its power if locked within the lamp, also <i>our</i> jinni will probably be unable to display <i>its</i> full beauty and potential if suffering behind the bars of severely limiting theories!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h113"/>Immanuel Kant and Emmanuel Swedenborg—Occultism at the Heart of Philosophy</p>
<p class="noindent">Let us have a closer look at non-locality (spooky action at a distance) by going back to one of the philosophical giants, namely Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). The Norwegian author Jens Bjørneboe humorously referred to him as ‘the mastodon’ because of his colossal weight in the history of philosophy. In his heyday, Kant and the swarm of interpreters feeding on his work were described by poets Goethe and Schiller in an aphorism:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Such is it, then, that a rich man will feed droves of beggars,<br/>Kings build their castles, make carters busy at work!</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Let’s put our pride aside, and blend in together with the other beggars and gorge ourselves with some of the delicacies served by King Kant!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h114"/>Space and Time—the Way We See the World</p>
<p class="noindent">Some of Kant’s main philosophical contributions were made regarding consciousness—not so much about how it arises, but rather how it works. Kant’s most radical idea in this area, the shift of perspective he himself described as a ‘Copernican revolution’ (after Nicolas Copernicus, who gave us a radically new understanding of the solar system), was that neither Space nor Time are parts of the physical world, but are rather embedded within our own consciousness! Space and Time are namely used by our consciousness as ‘tools’ to organize our reality; what we experience will be placed in Space and in Time: ‘Let’s have a coffee on the pier (Space) tomorrow night (Time),’ ‘We met in Venice (Space) in the summer four years ago (Time).’ Such organizing is all-encompassing, and is done spontaneously, continuously and inevitably. Space and Time are in some sense the ‘spectacles’ through which we see the world. If you wear glasses with green lenses, everything you look at will seem green. But the beautiful green color you then see when, for example, looking at the sky, certainly does not derive from the sky but from your glasses. In a somewhat similar way, according to Kant, our consciousness is wearing ‘Space glasses’ and ‘Time glasses’ and this is the reason why we experience Space and Time as part of the physical world.</p>
<p class="indent">The reality lying behind our ‘glasses’ Kant named <i>Ding an sich</i>—the thing for itself. This is a sphere he thinks we cannot really get to know, thus he is extremely reluctant to try to give descriptions—in writing, that is. But from notes made by his students, we can see that in his lectures Kant actually speculates quite a lot about this sphere and our possible experience of it after death. His statements seem to indicate that he thinks that the intellectual part of man may well be immortal and may after death continue to exist in a spiritual state, beyond time and space, where communication is immediate—in fact, quite like by telepathy…</p>
<p class="indent">If we speculate further along Kant’s ‘spectacular’ way of thought, we might wonder: Does our consciousness have the opportunity to take off its ‘Space glasses’ in this life? (‘Time glasses’ we shall return to in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>). For it could, in fact, seem to be exactly this that occurs when the Snåsa Man, according to the avalanche expert mentioned earlier in the chapter, provides a detailed description of a place where he never has been. It seems that to him—that is, to his consciousness—Space (distance) simply does not exist. And Kant has in fact made statements indicating that it, at least for some people, might be possible to ‘throw away the glasses.’ The reason for such an occult way of thinking was his preoccupation with Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772), a famous Swedish scientist and mystic.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h115"/>A Swashbuckling Swede</p>
<p class="noindent">Swedenborg had done research in geometry, chemistry, metallurgy and astronomy, and later he made some highly ‘modern’ discoveries/suggestions regarding the functions of the nervous system and of the brain. However, after a spiritual crisis around 1740 Swedenborg increasingly turned his focus toward the occult and studied Christian mysticism and the Kabbalah, the Jewish esoteric tradition. Swedenborg had many exalted visions of the afterlife, and felt he could communicate with dead people. And last but not least, he seemed to have developed a strong ability for clairvoyance, of which he gave several astonishing demonstrations. This had given Kant something—in fact, a lot—to think about…</p>
<p class="indent">Our knowledge of these matters stems not from Kant’s books for here he is usually reticent or even flat-out negative regarding the occult. However, we have a long personal letter in his hand telling a quite different story. Kant had, probably some time during 1762, received a request from Charlotte von Knobloch, a lady who wanted to know what Kant thought about Swedenborg and his alleged clairvoyant abilities. Kant was a thorough man, and spent a lot of time familiarizing himself with the matter. In his reply dated August 10, 1763 he apologizes to the gracious lady that she had had to wait:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I would not have deprived myself so long of the honor and pleasure of obeying the request of a lady who is the ornament of her sex, in communicating the desired information, if I had not deemed it necessary previously to inform myself thoroughly concerning the subject of your request</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Now, these were times in which one knew how to express oneself! Kant goes on to say that he is not aware that anybody has ever ‘perceived in me an inclination to the marvelous or a weakness tending to credulity.’ And he relates that he had been, if not completely dismissive, at least very wary of stories about spirits and other occult matters, ‘This is the position in which my mind stood for a long time, until the report concerning Swedenborg came to my notice.’ (Kant often shortens Swedenborg’s name, Hr von Swed, etc. but we’ll spell it out in full.) Kant now presents two well-documented cases that he believes show Swedenborg’s clairvoyant abilities to be beyond doubt. The story that made the strongest impression on him was related to the great fire in Stockholm in 1756. We’ll give the word to Kant:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>The following occurrence appears to me to have the greatest weight of proof, and to place the assertion respecting Swedenborg’s extraordinary gift beyond all conceivable doubt</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>In the year 1759, towards the end of September, on Saturday at four o’clock p.m., Swedenborg arrived at Gothenburg from England, when Mr. William Castel invited him to his house, together with a party of fifteen persons. About six o’clock Swedenborg went out, and returned to the company quite pale and alarmed. He said that a dangerous fire had just broken out in Stockholm, at the Södermalm (Gothenburg is more than fifty miles [one old German mile = c. 7.5 km] from Stockholm) and that it was spreading very fast. He was restless, and went out often. He said that the house of one of his friends, whom he named, was already in ashes, and that his own was in danger. At eight o’clock, after he had been out again, he joyfully exclaimed, ‘Thank God! the fire is extinguished; the third door from my house.’</i></p>
<p class="indent"><i>This news occasioned great commotion throughout the whole city, but particularly amongst the company in which he was. It was announced to the Governor the same evening. On Sunday morning Swedenborg was summoned to the Governor who questioned him concerning the disaster. Swedenborg described the fire precisely, how it had begun and in what manner it had ceased, and how long it had continued</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>On the same day the news spread through the city, and as the Governor thought it worthy of attention, the consternation was considerably increased; because many were in trouble [upset] on account of their friends and property, which might have been involved in the disaster</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>On Monday evening a messenger arrived at Gothenburg, who was dispatched by the Board of Trade during the time of the fire. In the letters brought by him, the fire was described precisely in the manner stated by Swedenborg</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>On Tuesday morning the Royal Courier arrived at the Governor’s with the melancholy intelligence [news] of the fire, of the loss which it had occasioned, and of the houses it had damaged and ruined, not in the least differing from that which Swedenborg had given at the very time when it happened; for the fire was extinguished at eight o’clock</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>What can be brought forward against the authenticity of this event? My friend who wrote this to me has examined all, not only in Stockholm, but also, about two months ago, in Gothenburg, where he is well acquainted with the most respectable houses, and where he could obtain the most authentic and complete information, for as only a very short time has elapsed since 1759, most of the inhabitants are still alive who were eyewitnesses of this occurrence</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">So, here we see the Enlightenment’s greatest philosopher professing his conviction of the reality of Swedenborg’s clairvoyance—a strong testimony, indeed!</p>
<p class="indent">It may therefore seem surprising that Kant in 1766 published a tract called <i>The Dreams of a Spirit-Seer</i>, where he writes ironically about both Swedenborg’s person and his ideas. But nevertheless Kant repeats an abbreviated version of the story of the fire in Stockholm, plus a few other accounts of Swedenborg’s clairvoyance. Confusing… so that it’s hard to be sure what Kant really intended with this publication. Kant’s friend, the Enlightenment philosopher Moses Mendelssohn (grandfather of the composer Felix Mendelssohn of the ‘Wedding March’ fame), writes that one is left in doubt whether Kant ‘wanted to make fun of metaphysics, or whether he wanted to praise clairvoyance.’ It seems likely, though, that the tract was a reflection of Kant’s disappointment with Swedenborg’s <i>philosophy</i> (which we know he had studied thoroughly after writing the letter to Miss von Knobloch) due to its vast amount of quirky visions and lofty speculations. As a thinker, Kant was nothing if not rational.</p>
<p class="indent">All in all it would be apt to describe Kant’s relationship both to the occult and to Swedenborg as <i>ambivalent</i>. Outwardly, such as in his legendary <i>Critique of Pure Reason</i>, Kant distances himself from ‘these things.’ While some smaller tracts and letters show that Kant, the rationalist <i>par excellence</i>, had a fascination with the guilty pleasures of occultism. Students’ notes from his lectures show Kant repeatedly returning to Swedenborg, for the most part with respect, but his descriptions of the mystic/philosopher also portray him as from ‘sublime’ to ‘cheater.’ Some think that career considerations could have made Kant speak with forked tongues in relation to this heretical ‘enthusiast’ (<i>enthousiasmos</i> = god possessed). Others think the schism could be due to Kant undergoing internal conflicts, thereby changing his opinion over time. While still others have argued that the ambiguity is founded on Kant’s distinction between <i>philosophy</i> (which can provide reliable, universally valid knowledge) and <i>revelation</i> (which <i>may</i> be true, but which could just as easily be wrong). And Kant, in fact, once stated that ‘all sight of spirits and ghosts, all dream interpretations, predictions about the future, forebodings and things of that sort are inferior because they cannot be subsumed under any form of law.’ <i>Ordnung muss sein</i>! (There must be order!) and Truth is too serious a matter to be left to the mercy of visionary whims and flights of fancy.</p>
<p class="indent">It has thus been customary to emphasize the disagreements in Kant’s relationship to Swedenborg. But in recent times, some commentators have argued that Kant must surely have attributed great importance to Swedenborg since he deliberated over Swedenborg’s ideas, engaging in internal, imaginary quarrels with him, for over 30 years! And it is likely that Swedenborg influenced several aspects of Kant’s work.</p>
<p class="indent">In 1734 Swedenborg launched the now widely accepted <i>nebular hypothesis</i>, where the sun and other stars are thought to have been formed out of huge clouds of hydrogen. About 20 years later Kant published a work in which he further builds on this groundbreaking idea, which today is often referred to as the <i>Kant–Laplace hypothesis</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">Apparently Swedenborg also influenced a central idea in Kant’s moral philosophy: that a person should never be considered as a means, but always as an end. Kant expresses this idea by saying that a human being is ‘a citizen of the Kingdom of Purpose’ (<i>Reich der Zwecke</i>). This strange concept is otherwise known only from Swedenborg (in Latin: <i>Regnum Finium</i>), where it describes a spiritual realm where souls communicate directly, as by telepathy. There is no physical space, and the ‘position’ of the individual souls in relation to one another is based on their mutual likes and dislikes, as well as their moral and spiritual levels.</p>
<p class="indent">And finally it has been claimed that Kant’s radically new ideas about Space and Time, his epochal ‘Copernican revolution,’ can be seen as a de-theologized version of Swedenborg’s philosophy, in which humans are considered to be participating in both a Spiritual World (essentially beyond Space and Time) and a sensual world (subjected to Space and Time). Similar notions are of course also found with other philosophers. But in addition to Swedenborg’s <i>books</i> there was also, as we know, the impact of the incidents involving his alleged clairvoyance. For example, the episode where Swedenborg was purportedly able to ‘see’ the fire in Stockholm even when physically in Gothenburg. As we saw in the letter to Charlotte von Knobloch this episode made a strong impression on Kant; yes, he even claims it places Swedenborg’s clairvoyance ‘beyond all conceivable doubt.’ So, this event demonstrated to Kant that Space (distance) poses no insurmountable barrier to consciousness. And perhaps this, then, was precisely what sparked off his idea that Space originates not from outside but from within, from consciousness itself? <i>If</i> this really should be the case—and for now we’ll have to leave the issue to future archival research, hopefully discovering more letters, more lectures, etc.—then the perhaps most radical idea in Kant’s mastodonic influential philosophy would be built on Swedenborg’s clairvoyance!</p>
<p class="indent">The two men never met face to face, nor did they correspond. Kant sent Swedenborg a letter early in his career, but never received any reply. The collection <i>Kant on Swedenborg</i> (listed in the bibliography) contains some interesting texts illustrative of Kant’s love–hate relationship with this highly gifted scientist and mystic.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h116"/>Magic and Modernity</p>
<p class="noindent">Not only in the case of Kant, but also generally, the emergence of modern philosophy and science was far more influenced by mysticism, magic and occultism than one is usually aware. Goethe, intuitive and precise cultural diagnostician as he was, expresses this connection by making his Doctor Faust—the symbol of modern man—to be a <i>philosopher, scientist</i> and <i>magician</i>. This modern mentality is certainly not the humility of the medieval monks and nuns, subordinate to God and to the Church. Nay, rather it is the self-reliance of the Renaissance magician, who with his/her will to power and insight into the forces of nature—for better or worse—takes control of the world, hesitant to recognize any heavenly or mundane limitations: Should we go to the Moon—sure, why not? Should we create artificial life—sure, why not? ‘Man as Magus’ is the classic slogan for this mentality.</p>
<p class="indent">This highly exciting theme—the importance of magic and occultism in the emergence of modern science and mentality—has for the past 50 years been charted by historians of ideas, pioneered by the groundbreaking work (although challenged by some) <i>Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition</i> (1964) by the British classicist Frances A. Yates. Unfortunately we do not have the space to delve into this matter here, so we will restrict ourselves to providing some quick examples.</p>
<p class="indent">Johannes Kepler, the pioneering astronomer, was also court astrologer and made his living from horoscopes. Giordano Bruno, who was burned at the stake, suffered this fate not only because of his astronomical theories but also just as much—probably even more so—for his occult beliefs. John Dee, England’s greatest mathematician in the time of Elizabeth I, was deeply into occultism, mediumship and ritual magic. Robert Boyle, the father of modern chemistry, both researched and defended healing. And the great Sir Isaac Newton wrote in fact more pages on alchemy and biblical prophesies than on conventional science. Occult societies such as the Freemasons and Rosicrucians made significant contributions to the Scientific Revolution of 1500–1700. And to top it all it turns out that Immanuel Kant, the uncrowned king of the Enlightenment, could readily be described as being a closet occultist!</p>
<p class="indent">Given this close relationship earlier in history it could perhaps be hoped that science now—quite without shame—would dare to make use of some of the insights that occult traditions might possess regarding consciousness? For instance that it perhaps is able to act non-locally, as Swedenborg seemingly substantiates. Maybe if science could once again start talking more in depth with its black sheep relative, occultism, we could take steps to further develop the model of consciousness called for earlier in this chapter. That is to say, a model that may better encompass the fullness of human experience, including the experiences of telepathy, clairvoyance and precognition that for some strange reason are reported from nearly all cultures, all places and all times.</p>
<p class="indent">Those non-ordinary experiences continue to occur even in our modern Western societies, where, as we mentioned in the introduction, more than half of the population according to statistics will have some kind of paranormal experience. If only a single one out of all these millions of experiences should be about <i>real</i> telepathy, <i>real</i> clairvoyance, <i>real</i> precognition—well, this would probably show the need to put the standard model of consciousness up for review. For to repeat William James: ‘If you wish to upset the law that all crows are black, you mustn’t seek to show that no crows are; it is enough if you prove one single crow to be white.’ The award-winning (and controversial) Czech-American psychiatrist Stan Grof has published a fascinating book called <i>When the Impossible Happens</i> where herds of snow-white crows are flapping along the pages.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h117"/>Which is Further Away: York or New York?—Entanglement and Non-Locality</p>
<p class="bq"><i>The layman always means, when he says ‘reality’ that he is speaking of something self-evidently known; whereas to me it seems the most important and exceedingly difficult task of our time is to work on the construction of a new idea of reality</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Wolfgang Pauli, physicist, Nobel laureate</p>
<p class="noindent">In 2011 a book with the amusing title <i>How the Hippies Saved Physics: Science, Counterculture, and the Quantum Revival</i> was released. The author, David Kaiser, a physicist and historian tenured at Harvard, shows how the postwar era saw a shift in physics, which moved away from a philosophical orientation toward a more technological approach. What now became the important thing was physics’ <i>instrumentality</i>: making better shavers, faster cars, winning the arms race, getting us to the moon, etc. Reading the writings of the interwar period grandees, those who gave us the theory of relativity and quantum theory—Einstein, Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, etc.—it becomes clear that they were not only physicists but also philosophers. They intensely debated the significance of physics in relation to the Big Questions, and Life itself. The great Danish physicist Niels Bohr said: ‘Who is not shaken by quantum theory has not understood it.’ That real physics meant far more than making sophisticated models, and expanding our mastery of the elements was obvious.</p>
<p class="indent">We have already seen examples of both Erwin Schrödinger’s and Wolfgang Pauli’s mystical philosophical orientation. And as mentioned in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a> in connection with C.G. Jung, for Pauli this also meant taking the paranormal into account. The quantum-pioneer Pascual Jordan, who was nominated for the Nobel Prize by Einstein (but whose Nazi leanings may have cost him the award), wrote several articles about parapsychology. And even Albert the Great—Einstein himself—whose interest in general philosophy is well known, was not without an interest in the paranormal. A couple of times he attended séances and recounts having been really impressed with the amount of information the medium was able to provide—yes, he even invited her for supper afterwards, so impressed was he! (We’ll take his word that this was the bona fide reason…)</p>
<p class="indent">Einstein also took the initiative to write a preface to <i>Mental Radio</i> (1930), a book about telepathy by the then famous author Upton Sinclair. Einstein writes: ‘I have read the book of Upton Sinclair with great interest and am convinced that the same deserves the most earnest consideration, not only of the laity, but also of the psychologists by profession.’ Note that Einstein does <i>not</i> claim that the book’s many captivating case studies prove telepathy to be a reality, but still he concludes: ‘In no case should the psychologically interested circles pass over this book heedlessly.’ In 1946, in a letter to the psychoanalyst Jan Eherenwald, Einstein says he is skeptical about telepathy. But he also states: ‘I can judge as a layman only, and cannot state that I arrived at an affirmative or negative conclusion (i.e. concerning telepathy). In any case, it appears to me that from the physicist’s point of view, we have no right to rule out a priori the possibility of telepathy. For that the foundations of our science are too uncertain and incomplete…’</p>
<p class="indent">Even if the great physicists of the interwar period were not actively engaging in spiritual practices, their <i>longing</i>, their <i>urge</i>—having lost the security of Newtonian physics—may perhaps be aptly summed up in the yearnings of Goethe’s Faust as he, having exhausted all normal science and being in deep despair, starts to embrace magic (and modern science has indeed become our form of magic!):</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>That I may detect the inmost force<br/>Which binds the world, and guides its course</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><a id="h118"/>Postwar Physics—from Philosophy to Engineering</p>
<p class="noindent">The postwar generation of physicists, however, found that the new mathematical models had legs of their own, and that they worked perfectly without any accompanying philosophical musings. Their ambitions thus became more practical, e.g. delivering new technologies to business, to the military and to space exploration. The Cold War obviously had a marked impact on this shift to the practical as it became of utmost importance to keep apace technologically with the Eastern bloc. But it also seems as if even the <i>Zeitgeist</i>, the spirit of the age, was becoming extremely practical. Hence those nightly talks, delving into philosophy that the interwar physicists so fervently had engaged in, gradually fell out of fashion. Of course, there will always be the notable exception of the theoretical physicists but in general physicists in the period from, say, 1945 to 1970 became increasingly seen less as <i>philosophers</i> and more as <i>engineers</i>. Kaiser says that the <i>Physical Review</i>, the most prestigious of the physics journals, systematically refused to print articles having philosophical overtones. And the universities urged physics students to bring their philosophical concerns to heel. And so it came to be, according to Kaiser, that in the early 1970s the educational institutions were collectively chanting the mantra: ‘Shut up and calculate!’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h119"/>The Fundamental Fysiks Group</p>
<p class="noindent">However, not everyone wanted to join this chorus: A group of gifted and playful young physicists at Berkeley thought they would rather ruffle some feathers and formed the <i>Fundamental Fysiks Group</i>—a kind of physics-based philosophical think tank. (They probably used ‘f’ and ‘k,’ rather than ‘ph’ and ‘c,’ in their name to allude to the great quantum pioneers, mostly writing in German.) This wild bunch of ‘hippie-physicists,’ like their interwar role models, dared to ask and even answer fundamental questions about the significance of physics for our worldview, not least for our views on humanity and consciousness.</p>
<p class="indent">Central names in the Fundamental Fysiks Group were Elizabeth Rauscher (quantum physicist, parapsychologist), Johan Clauser (quantum physicist, experimental physicist), Fritjof Capra (quantum physicist, mystical and environmental philosopher) and Henry Stapp (quantum physicist, awareness theorist; important for the authors of <i>Irreducible Mind</i>). Some of the physicists from the Fundamental Fysiks Group were used as consultants for Stargate, where, as we saw in <a href="07_chapter02.xhtml">chapter 2</a>, the military and intelligence community tried to use clairvoyance for espionage purposes. More recently, their research has contributed to the development of so-called <i>quantum cryptography</i>, applying the principles of quantum physics to ensure that, say, financial transactions and electronic voting become unhackable (but it seems the technology wasn’t implemented in the 2016 US elections. Sad.).</p>
<p class="indent">The Fundamental Fysiks Group was particularly engaged in <i>Bell’s theorem</i>, which implies that subatomic particles (the ‘building blocks’ of atoms) that had once been in close contact may somehow continue their ‘relationship’ even when moving apart from each other. This strange phenomenon—strange for particles, not for humans!—is called ‘entanglement.’ The connection between them is said to be <i>non-local</i>. Already in the 1930s Einstein understood that bizarre phenomena like entanglement and non-locality lay embedded in quantum theory. But Einstein didn’t believe things ‘hang together’ in this way—quite literally—and critically labeled the idea <i>spukhafte Fernwirkung</i>, ‘spooky action at a distance.’ Nevertheless, despite his impressive intellect, Einstein was wrong about quantum entanglement. And the first to experimentally demonstrate that entanglement and quantum non-locality is indeed real was John Clauser from the Fundamental Fysiks Group.</p>
<p class="indent">Einstein was however convinced of the possibility of another type of non-locality, namely the <i>Einstein-Rosen Bridge</i>, popularly called ‘wormholes.’ These are ‘shortcuts’ through Space and Time, allowing us—just in theory, as for now—to enter the universe in one place and emerge in quite another! This exciting concept has been further developed by the award-winning physicist Kip Thorne.</p>
<p class="indent">One classic experiment demonstrating quantum entanglement entails making two electrons collide. In the collision ‘sparks’ are formed; two particles of light, twin photons, hurtle off in opposite directions. What is really fabulous, then, is that if one measures the movement of one of those photons (e.g. making a turn to the right) then the exact movement, but in an inverted way, can be measured from the other photon (making a turn to the left). The two photons are connected and behave like a unit, even if from all commonly held notions of space they are completely separated. And this applies, at least in principle, even if the photons should travel to either side of the universe!</p>
<p class="indent">Non-local connections were first detected between extremely tiny particles, but it has subsequently been demonstrated that they also form between larger molecules. One is unsure as to the extent and importance of the phenomenon. Most physicists apparently believe that non-locality primarily has significance at the micro-level. This is because the entangled particles for the most part will be ‘disturbed’ and thus decouple within a very short time. And then, falling back to a more stable state (de-coherence), there is no more entanglement but just ‘business as usual.’ While some argue that since all matter in fact was concatenated when the Big Bang ‘banged,’ it is in some sense and on some level reasonable to regard the world as forever being a vast network of non-local entanglements.</p>
<p class="indent">Regardless: several members of the Fundamental Fysiks Group felt that entanglement exhibits striking parallels to telepathy, in the sense that in both phenomena—the first one physical, the other one psychical—transcend what is usually thought of as Space. Could it be, then, that not only small particles but also our consciousness at a deep level works in an entangled and non-local way? Let’s once more use our little model of the Mental Internet: If you, for example, log onto Facebook, the profile of a person in York and a person in New York will in fact be at the same distance from you—if you’re online, you’re online!</p>
<p class="indent">The physicists in the Fundamental Fysiks Group had ideas pointing in this direction, and Elizabeth Rauscher, one of the group’s founders, has developed a highly sophisticated mathematical model that she thinks is able to explain the relationship between non-locality and the psi phenomena. This initiative was supported by the aforementioned Nobel laureate Eugene Wigner who, as has been said, was one of the physicists believing consciousness to be ubiquitous.</p>
<p class="indent">Another formerly mentioned Nobel laureate is the physicist Brian Josephson, who, although living in England, has fraternized with the Fundamental Fysiks Group. Josephson, who is an outspoken defender of psi, has spent the past decades researching the role of quantum physics and information theory in understanding biological processes. The possibility that telepathy and other psi phenomena are allowed for by quantum theory is frequently evoked by those who are psi positive and almost equally frequently dismissed by skeptics. But Josephson, who thinks that quantum physics is only a step on the road to explaining nature, thinks that entanglement and non-locality could provide useful models to make intelligible how psi phenomena may occur. Josephson has also humorously said that some seem to be so diehard skeptical that they probably would not have believed in psi even if they knew it to exist!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h120"/>From Twin Photons to Twin Sisters</p>
<p class="bq"><i>We are like islands in the sea, separate on the surface but connected in the deep</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ William James</p>
<p class="noindent">Both Kant’s idea that Space does not belong to the world itself, but rather is embedded in our own ‘glasses,’ our consciousness, as well as quantum physics’ notion of entanglement and non-locality, seem to suggest that spatial distance isn’t a barrier as insurmountable as often imagined. For perhaps consciousness in itself is basically a non-local phenomenon? And maybe precisely this is what could explain telepathy and clairvoyance? Now, we may argue and speculate, debate and deliberate, but luckily we need not roam around in complete conjectural darkness, for in fact some ‘hard’ science has been done that seemingly supports this hypothesis! Let’s have a look at an experiment that took place in Denmark in 2010.</p>
<p class="indent">Sara and Vicky are identical twins in their late twenties. They have always perceived themselves as being in close telepathic contact with one another—‘two souls, one thought’ is for them no cliché, but a most real thing. For example: Many times they independently of each other—at least on the physical plane—buy the same object (such as the exact same piece of clothing) at the very same time. Since these things happen regularly, and since they both think there are enough similarities between them as it is, they have made the following agreement: The sister who has the earliest issued cash register receipt gets to keep her object, while the other has to go back to the store and trade hers in! Quirky issues… But—need these coincidences be due to telepathy? Couldn’t their shared genes and common upbringing—normal physio-psychological factors—just as well be the reason they act in this coordinated manner? So which is it: paranormal or normal? Both the sisters as well as psychologist Adrian Parker, tenured professor at the University of Gothenburg, were eager to find out. Professor Parker thus designed an experiment that goes as follows.</p>
<p class="indent">Sara was placed in an isolated room in a laboratory where she—of course voluntarily—would be subjected to four mild shocks. Meanwhile, her sister Vicky was placed in a remote room where she was connected to advanced apparatus measuring bodily responses such as blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rhythm and electrical skin conductivity. To oversee and control the measurements a British expert on lie detectors had been hired. And to ensure an impartial assessment an inspector from the Danish police was present.</p>
<p class="indent">The four shocks Sara would be subjected to were: electric shock (an electric current sent through her finger), cold shock (her legs suddenly exposed to icy water), noise shock (a stack of plates shattered behind her back) and intimidation (a big ‘jack-in-the-box’ jumping out). But no one—neither the sisters nor the researchers—knew exactly <i>when</i> the shocks would be delivered, as this would be decided randomly by a computer. The reason why Parker chose such a procedure was to prevent cheating and/or suggestion from influencing the results. Since the points in time for the shocks were unknown, it was not possible for the sisters (or for the scientists) to coordinate their emotional reactions, either consciously or unconsciously.</p>
<p class="indent">The experiment started, and the results were astonishing: When Sara (sitting inside the isolated lab) was given the various shocks, strong bodily reactions were measured from Vicky! This apparently telepathic ‘shock-transference’ occurred with the first three shocks. But nothing happened in connection with the jack-in-the-box. As this didn’t frighten Sara, then, logically enough, no shock could be transferred. Within the boundaries of the standard model, where consciousness is seen to exist only inside the head of the individual, it seems very difficult to explain this result (unless one believes that the whole experiment is just a clever deception). If, however, one instead imagines that consciousness itself is an entangled phenomenon, working non-locally, then it is obviously much easier to understand how one sister spontaneously can have strong reactions when the other sister is subjected to shocks!</p>
<p class="indent">There is another interesting peculiarity about this experiment, namely that the sensors measuring Vicky’s reactions spiked two to three seconds <i>before</i> the various shocks were given. Disregarding, of course, possible cheating and methodological errors, this suggests precognition to have been at work. Many parapsychologists think the different psi phenomena could likely be seen as different expressions of one and the same phenomenon, whose essence is to ‘escape’ our everyday world of Space, Time and Causality. Consequently, these phenomena are not easily studied isolated from each other, neither in theory nor in practice. In <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>, in connection with J.B. Rhine, we will throw a little more light on this tricky side of psi, which is underscored by many parapsychologists and ridiculed by even more skeptics!</p>
<p class="indent">I have been communicating with Professor Parker, and he told me the procedures of his experiment are described in the latest edition of <i>Twin Telepathy</i> by Guy L. Playfair. Let me add that several other researchers have also performed experiments of a similar type, apparently being able to measure telepathic transference of sounds, lights and other stimuli.</p>
<p class="indent">The results from Professor Parker’s experiment correspond very well with the many stories circulating about people having strong bodily and/or emotional reactions simultaneously—or even just before—a close relative or friend is exposed to shock, accident or death. And as we know, this is what is often called <i>crisis telepathy</i>. An acquaintance of mine related the following little story: a woman, a friend of the family, had—apparently for no reason—risen up in bed in the middle of the night, exclaiming: ‘My brother is in pain!’ It later turned out that at that very moment her brother had been seriously injured in a car accident. So, was her eerily well-timed exclamation just a coincidence?—well, of course it <i>could</i> have been that, but… I’m convinced, based on experience as well as on hard statistics, that quite a few readers will have heard similar stories from <i>their</i> friends and/or family, or have themselves experienced such things. Even if nothing is finally proven, I think it is fair to say, though, that Adrian Parker’s experiment indicates that such stories need not be based on misunderstandings, lies or coincidences. Rather, it seems to support the possibility that at least some of the accounts of this type could refer to non-local communication between people—or telepathy, as we usually call it.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h121"/>Summary: Perspectives—‘Kantum’ Physics and Quantum Physics</p>
<p class="noindent">Well then, we have now arrived at the end of this little excursion in the highly diverse landscapes of consciousness! God/Fate/Coincidence willing we have avoided drowning in quagmires and swamps, falling prey to the anaconda of angst, the crocodile of confusion and other soul-swallowing monsters. Sure, it has been difficult many a time to overview the hills and the valleys, the jungles and the vast plains. But hopefully we have now and then gained a panoramic glimpse or two, allowing us to see things thought to be well known from a new angle and in a new light. And perhaps that may have opened some exciting new perspectives for us? ‘The hard question’—why conscious experience arises at all—we have neither answered nor tried to answer. But perhaps we have succeeded in kneading some stiffened clichés about what consciousness is and how it works? The chapter has in that respect had two main points which are closely related.</p>
<p class="indent">First point: There are things that indicate that consciousness in the last resort might be something other and much more than just reflections of flickering brain chemistry. Tentatively, consciousness may rather be seen as a kind of vast information field with a degree, perhaps even a high degree, of independent existence. Notions of this kind go way back in both Eastern and Western traditions, and lie at the base of many of the classical concepts denoting human consciousness, as for instance soul, spirit, psyche, pneuma, atman, ruach, and neshamah.</p>
<p class="indent">Psi phenomena—and several other anomalies, such as savantism, seem easier to welcome and explain with such an understanding than within a standard, ‘BrainUrine-based,’ model. The alternative models we briefly presented—Irreducible Mind, the Orch-Or, the hologram model, the zero point field—will all quite comfortably allow us to include the strange and exciting psi phenomena, or at least some of them. This is significant, for it has been said: ‘An explanatory model is no better than the description it gives of reality.’ Hence, if there are too many <i>anomalies</i>—experiences and incidents which the established model cannot account for in a convincing way (and concerning psi we are speaking of millions of cases)—it is natural, yes even necessary, that we look for other maps better describing the terrain. Meaning others models of consciousness better suited to accommodate the fullness of human experience.</p>
<p class="indent">Second point: Several things seem to indicate that our consciousness—in one way or another, at some level, working in some gear—acts non-locally, that is, without being confined to a specific place. Immanuel Kant’s exciting idea that Space does not belong to the physical world, but rather stems from our own ‘glasses,’ may according to our (perhaps a bit daring!) interpretation be one approach to non-locality. Kant’s ideas were likely inspired by the scientist and mystic Emanuel Swedenborg, both his work and the cases involving his alleged clairvoyance—most importantly the incident occurring in connection with the Stockholm fire in 1756. This extraordinary event, which according to Kant’s letter has ‘the greatest weight of proof’ and places ‘Swedenborg’s extraordinary gift beyond all conceivable doubt,’ if faithfully portrayed by Kant, supports the idea that consciousness may have a non-local dimension.</p>
<p class="indent">Quantum entanglement in itself does not say anything about the properties of consciousness. But it does not seem unreasonable to assume that since non-locality is demonstrably real in some connections it could perhaps be in others as well. And as we heard: Einstein, who dismissed the idea of quantum entanglement, suggested the existence of what today is called ‘wormholes’—shortcuts through Space and Time. This, in my humble opinion, is non-locality as good as any! That consciousness at its very base could be a non-local phenomenon has been proposed by several eminent physicists, some of them Nobel Prize winners. Moreover, Professor Adrian Parker’s experiment with Sara and Vicky (as well as similar experiments done by other researchers) seems to validate the idea that there are non-local connections between people. From our perspective it is precisely these connections—regardless of which model is used to describe them—which eventually could explain telepathy and perhaps also other psi phenomena.</p>
</body>
</html>