<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h150"/>Chapter 8</h2>
<h2 class="ct3">A VISIT TO THE PARAPSYCHOLOGIST’S LABORATORY</h2>
<p class="bq"><i>I believe there is no source of deception in the investigation of nature which can compare with a fixed belief that certain kinds of phenomena are impossible</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ William James</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h151"/>Introduction and Recommendations</p>
<p class="noindent">In this chapter we’ll knock on the door of the parapsychologist’s laboratory. As myriads of experiments of multiple types have been conducted over the years, our visit has the modest objective of getting to know a few samples of paradigmatic research—groundbreaking research that has become influential in the history of parapsychology. Since no research occurs in a vacuum, we will also examine important historical preconditions. Furthermore, we’ll hand out the <i>cartes de visite</i> to some key researchers whose acquaintance it might be worthwhile to make. And—let me now suggest some piquant courses that, if the <i>hors d’oeuvre</i> here served should whet your appetite, could preferably be included in a full dinner menu at a somewhat later time.</p>
<p class="indent">As a first course I suggest <i>Entangled Minds: Extrasensory Experiences in a Quantum Reality</i>. The author is Dean Radin—engineer, psychologist and formerly professional musician—who is head of research at the Institute of Noetic Sciences. Radin is among those who know most about what is going on in parapsychological laboratories. His interesting take on telepathy and clairvoyance is the suggestion that the synaptic fluid between the neurons in our brains might be entangled—as explained at some length in our <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>—with the universe at large, thus allowing for transfer of information across distances. His book has a personal approach, and in addition to its presentation of ‘hard’ science it is brimming with entertaining stories and anecdotes.</p>
<p class="indent">As a main course we could then perhaps gorge ourselves with the versatile essay collection <i>Parapsychology in the Twenty-First Century: Essays On the Future of Psychical Research</i> by Michael A. Thalbourne and Lance Storm (eds.). I consider this book a ‘must,’ presenting a broad spectrum of important topics, methods, procedures, problems and results (and lack thereof…) in parapsychology. It also outlines possible ways forward. The contributors are reputable professionals from many disciplines—psychology, psychiatry, philosophy, and the social sciences. This ensures high quality, but—as often is the case with hearty fare—the serving might need to be digested slowly and thoughtfully.</p>
<p class="indent">And then, going for the sweet finale, we could enjoy <i>The End of Materialism: How Evidence of the Paranormal is Bringing Science and Spirit Together</i> by the very experienced psychologist and parapsychologist Professor Charles Tart. (As usual: Tart will make for a most agreeable dessert…). This is a great presentation, informative and well written, with multiple exciting examples of apparently paranormal manifestations. As Tart has a strong commitment to ‘the cause’—the ending of materialism—some readers will probably feel that his book is slightly more ‘believing’ than what can be considered scientifically healthy. While others probably find that Tart’s personal engagement is precisely what gives his book its quality. And after all, who ever said that the only reason for having dessert is for health reasons?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h152"/>Historical Prerequisites and Obstacles</p>
<p class="noindent">As mentioned earlier, the great American philosopher and psychologist William James (1842–1910) became the first president of ASPR, the American Society for Psychical Research. James actively campaigned for the recognition of parapsychology, and the US eventually went on to become the first country conducting systematic and statistically rigorous laboratory trials in the field. The biologist J.B. Rhine became the main person in this undertaking and his ESP research at Duke University during the 1930s was truly epochal.</p>
<p class="indent">True, that in the 1880s the French Nobel laureate, physician and parapsychologist Charles Richet had experimented with clairvoyance using cards concealed in envelopes; the test subjects would try to ‘see’ and identify the cards, and afterwards the results were evaluated statistically. However, Richet’s research was small scale and did not—at least not there and then—have far-reaching consequences. And although the studies conducted in England by the Society for Psychical Research were both comprehensive and upheld high standards (today this is a generally accepted assessment, though many skeptics don’t agree), they primarily examined phenomena that happened spontaneously, and thus their way of research did not meet the requirements for <i>replication</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">The possibility of repeating an experiment—making <i>replications</i>—is an important criterion in any fully-fledged branch of natural science. (This does not apply unconditionally, though. For example, in astronomy and geology research—the Big Bang, continental shifts, etc.—the replication of experimental conditions is impossible.) In <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a> we mentioned that since psi phenomena like all things human—say, a battle, an election, a marriage—are to some degree unpredictable and for the most part not replicable—perhaps it is more relevant to study psi with methods from the humanities than from the natural sciences. But then, one method hardly excludes another. Probably a wide array of approaches—studies both in laboratories and of real-life phenomena, using both brain scanners and spiritual interpretation, utilizing the expertise of physicians and anthropologists—will give us the best and most relevant understanding of psi.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h153"/>Bragging Behaviorism</p>
<p class="noindent">Of the paranormal seeds that William James sowed many fell upon the stony pavements of the university courtyards, hibernating in cracks and crevices for a couple of decades before being able to germinate. This late blossoming was due to the intellectual movement which from about 1900 became widespread in psychology, namely that of <i>behaviorism</i>. This was a climate most unfavorable to occultism’s wild vegetation, as behaviorism tends to disparage all forms of subjective experience: consciousness, thoughts, feelings, introspection. Instead, the focus is—as the term clearly reveals—on behavior. And the objective description (and the possible correction) of behavior is considered psychology’s main task; everything else will more or less be relegated to ‘fiction,’ ‘art,’ or ‘literature.’ Thus research on the paranormal—at least as it was conducted under the auspices of SPR—belongs to a completely different universe.</p>
<p class="indent">The grand old man of behaviorism—though he did not invent the term—was the Russian physician/physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936). Perhaps the name rings a bell? I would guess that many readers remember that Pavlov was the one using bells in experiments with ‘classical conditioning’ in dogs. The dogs were given food simultaneously as Pavlov rang a bell; when the dogs later heard the same bell they would produce the same physiological reaction (salivation) as when given food. ‘The dark side’ was that Pavlov would also experiment with giving the dogs electrical shocks while ringing another (differently tuned) bell. Later, when hearing this other bell, the dogs would recoil in fear. And when ringing both bells at the same time—one heralding pleasure, the other heralding pain—the dogs would eventually have something close to a nervous breakdown. (Scientific experiment is not an unequivocally nice thing…)</p>
<p class="indent">Following on from Pavlov, the American psychologist John B. Watson (1878–1958) invented the term ‘behaviorism.’ Using Johns Hopkins University as his pulpit Watson fervently preached the gospel of ‘classical conditioning.’ Newspapers featured serials on the hair-raising experiments he conducted on the nervous system of ‘Little Albert,’ a young boy used as guinea pig, and so the general public were introduced to the controversial methods and philosophy of behaviorism. Later, the behaviorist’s baton was passed on to the psychologist B.F. Skinner (1904–1990).</p>
<p class="indent">During the first half of the 20th century behaviorism was the presiding current in American psychology. In Europe it exerted great influence, although there its impact would be cushioned by important figures. For example, European theorists such as Sigmund Freud, C.G. Jung and Karl Jaspers all ascribed the utmost importance to the inner life, whereas a proper behaviorist, <i>au contraire</i>, held that the gaze of science should only be bestowed upon that which may be counted, measured and weighed. The philosophy behind this view is called ‘positivism’ and originated with the French philosopher Auguste Comte (1798–1857). Thus behaviorism and positivism are ideological stablemates: all emphasis is put on the <i>external</i> aspects of the person, and existential questions about the meaning of life, love and friendship, contact and communication, personal truth and integrity are perceived not only as a hair but almost as a mammoth in the soup. Hence the ‘hairy’ paranormal phenomena—which tend to occur in conjunction with a strong inner life—rarely find shelter within the premises of such teachings; structures which often appear almost as mental bunkers designed as a defense against human unpredictability.</p>
<p class="indent">The behaviorists’ triumph was greeted with rounds of applause from the advertising industry where the newfound tools for manipulating consumers were welcomed 10,000 times, and celebrated with drums, trumpets and jubilant voices as it were, almost resembling an Old Testament coronation. Psychology and advertising courted each other, and some time after having been dismissed from Johns Hopkins University because of an extramarital affair, Watson started working at J. Walter Thompson, then the world’s largest advertising agency. Starting out at a low level, he rapidly rose in the ranks. So, at the same time and with the same virtuosity as Jelly Roll Morton played his ‘Finger Buster’ on the piano, Watson was playing on the psychological keys of customers. He proved to be so successful in creating ‘buying behavior,’ making that <i>clinking, clanking sound</i> ring out loudly and proudly from the cash registers, that the company eventually awarded him the title of ‘vice president.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h154"/>Boulders in the Stream</p>
<p class="noindent">However, American psychology had some highly talented people who refused to genuflect to the Baal of behaviorism. One of those unbending men was William McDougall (1871–1938). McDougall had originally been at Oxford University, but in 1920 he accepted an offer from Harvard, more or less taking over William James’ old position. However, within a few years—apparently because of skirmishes with colleagues—he left for Duke University to establish an institute of psychology. McDougall wrote influential textbooks in psychology of the mainstream kind, but simultaneously he warmly defended parapsychology. (In England he had for a period been president of the Society for Psychical Research.) McDougall was fully convinced that telepathy was both provable and proven, and to ensure the quality of research within the field he set up a parapsychology lab at Duke—the very first of its kind. Under the leadership of J.B. Rhine this lab was to become a paranormal powerhouse within academia.</p>
<p class="indent">Gardner Murphy (1895–1979) was another towering anti-behaviorist—some hold him to be almost as influential as William James. During his career Murphy was associated with various top universities—Yale, Harvard, and Columbia—and for a while he even held the prestigious office as president of APA, the American Psychological Association. Moreover he was president of the ASPR, the American Society for Psychical Research. Murphy believed that conventional thinking, ‘common sense,’ thwarted the acceptance of psi, and declared that if another science had provided just one tenth of the evidence presented by parapsychology the case for psi would have been settled, done and dusted. Murphy wrote diverse textbooks in psychology, and was in particular occupied with topics such as personality, motivation and creativity. Within parapsychology his research detected that extroverted and creative people tended to score higher on psi tests than those who were introspective and routine bound. (But he couldn’t rule out that this could be because the extroverts felt more comfortable in the laboratory.) Murphy was also a supporter of the idea of a collective field of Consciousness binding us all together.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h155"/>First We Take the Campus, Then We Take the World—J.B. Rhine</p>
<p class="noindent">The man who modernized parapsychology and introduced it on the world stage of modern science was J.B. Rhine (1895–1980). Educated as a biologist and definitely not a freak or on the fringe, Rhine was an obstinate man who initially had been skeptical of paranormal claims. But during a lecture given by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, he was made aware that various prominent scientists were deeply engaged in such phenomena (as mentioned in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>, many early Nobel laureates were members of the Society for Psychical Research). Rhine made further inquiries, and his wide reading included <i>Body and Mind</i> by William McDougall (see above). He was shaken when he gradually came to realize that paranormal phenomena might, in fact, be physically real. This did not mean that he lost his critical sense. On the contrary, in 1926 he exposed the notable Boston medium ‘Margery’ (Mina Crandon) in such an eviscerating way that Conan Doyle felt the need to counter with running a large ad in a Boston newspaper simply stating: ‘J.B. Rhine is a monumental ass’! I have—unsuccessfully—tried to find out which newspaper this was, and the story may, in fact, be apocryphal. Still, it probably is representative of the tension between them.</p>
<p class="indent">Rhine, who was neither inclined toward nor had the skills for diplomacy, severed his relations with many of the members of the American Society for Psychical Research. However, William McDougall appreciated Rhine’s uncompromising love of truth, and they collaborated professionally.</p>
<p class="indent">Rhine’s research at Duke University during the 1930s became the model for parapsychology in the ensuing decades. Rhine based his approach on three principles: 1) using ordinary people (not gurus or mediums) as test subjects; 2) having simple, transparent procedures; and 3) making thorough statistical evaluations of the results. The reason why Rhine chose to work with ordinary men and women was that he assumed ESP to be an element of perception just as, say, vision, hearing, etc. Rhine’s procedures were sober and methodical, it is tempting to say <i>tedious</i>. He was not in it for the spectacular as, say, the conjuring of spirits or sightings of aliens. His attention was rather directed at the small phenomena that (hopefully) could be replicated time and time again in a laboratory; in that respect Rhine was a behaviorist as good as any. This didn’t mean, however, that he was without interest in other things. But the task of charting a multitude of spontaneously occurring episodes, collecting and collating paranormal stories reported from all over the United States, was assigned to his colleague and wife, the biologist Louisa Rhine.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h156"/>Rhine’s Experiments with ESP—Basic Methods and Results</p>
<p class="noindent">Rhine focused primarily on telepathy, clairvoyance and precognition. He also did some, though much less, research on telekinesis, and nearly none on healing. Thus Rhine’s research was primarily devoted to ESP (paranormal transference of information) and only to a limited degree to PK (paranormal transference of energy).</p>
<p class="indent">Rhine conducted research for several decades, and through the years he employed different methods—the most prevalent was the drawing of cards. Rhine had one of his colleagues, Karl Zener (1903–1964) design a special pack of cards—Zener cards—using only five different symbols. Each card was to have a distinct image so as to make it impossible to confuse them. This is highly important when trying to ‘send’ and ‘receive’ the symbols via ESP. The symbols on the Zener cards are: circle, cross, waves, square, and star.</p>
<p class="indent">Typically Rhine would use two subjects at a time—let’s call them Jack and Jill. To avoid cheating or other leakage of information, Jack and Jill were separated, sometimes even located in different buildings. The different ESP capabilities could be tested as follows:</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Telepathy</i>: Jack draws a random card and contemplates the symbol depicted. Now Jill (located in another room/building) will attempt to ‘see,’ guess, perceive, sense, etc. which of the five symbols—circle, cross, waves, square, or star—Jack is contemplating. Hence Jill is trying to read Jack’s mind telepathically. The researchers register Jill’s guess, if it is right or wrong, and act as scorekeepers.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Clairvoyance</i>: Jack draws a random card and—without turning it—places it face down on the table. Jill (who is still in another room/building) will then attempt to ‘see,’ guess, perceive, sense which of the five symbols is depicted on the card that Jack has just drawn. Unlike in the previous experiment Jack now doesn’t know which symbol is on the card. Therefore if Jill manages to ‘see’ the card correctly, it cannot presumably be due to telepathy but rather to clairvoyance (or chance).</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Precognition</i>: In advance—before Jack has drawn any card at all—Jill (who is in another room/building) will attempt to ‘see,’ guess, perceive, sense which symbol is on the card that Jack is about to draw. Jill’s guess is written down, and it is only now that Jack will draw a card. As usual, the researchers register Jill’s guess and keep score.</p>
<p class="indent">Experiments like these were repeated again and again (and again and again!) for days and weeks on end, eventually adding up to a series of tens of thousands of draws/guesses. In this way mere chance and fluke were gradually eliminated from the data, making it possible to obtain results that were statistically significant.</p>
<p class="indent">Rhine’s first book was based on an analysis of more than 90,000 draws! From pure chance we should—since there are five different Zener cards—expect hits in approximately 1/5 of the cases, that is to say a hit rate of 20 percent. But, in fact, the test subjects had on average a far higher score than 20 percent—one of the subjects even managed to produce a long series with an average of 39.6 percent hits, close to double the score that would be expected from mere coincidence. The results therefore appeared to be highly significant, suggesting to Rhine that ESP was very real indeed.</p>
<p class="indent">Rhine also thought the results showed that just as there are exceptionally gifted people in most areas of life, there are, in fact, also people with exceptional skills in ESP. Perhaps the most impressive of Rhine’s subjects was a theology student who outperformed expectations in a really grand style. When the experimental series were seen as a whole the odds for achieving his score from mere chance was calculated to be less than one in a billion!</p>
<p class="indent">So far so good. But, what would happen on various occasions was that the test subjects started out having good results but after some time they would gradually decline. Rhine referred to this as ‘the decline effect,’ which he thought could be explained by fatigue and boredom—that the exacting toll of hours and days of drawing-and-guessing would impair the subjects’ extra sensory perception, much in the same way as it would have impaired nearly any mental functioning, say, the ability to perform mental arithmetic. However, whereas skeptics often argue that the initial good results may have been due to random variations and that over time it was to be expected, with a long series of guessing the results would even out. This is often referred to as a ‘regression toward the mean.’ If you toss a coin five times you might well get 100 percent heads and 0 percent tails. But if you toss the coin say 500 times you’ll get very close to a heads/tails ratio of 50/50.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h157"/>Laurels, Roses, and Some Thorns…</p>
<p class="noindent">In 1934 Rhine presented parts of his results to the public in a book simply called <i>Extra Sensory Perception</i>. The book received good reviews and became a bestseller, but it also caused a hailstorm of criticism to erupt in this usually quite measured field—ranging from well-meaning objections to pure harassment. In the following years Rhine, a stickler for truth, tried to account for and refute all and every serious objection. In 1937, as part of this process he had the American Institute of Mathematics approve his statistical procedures. He also acquired a machine to shuffle the cards used in the experiments to avoid anyone, intentionally or unintentionally, influencing the order of the cards. The test subjects would now be isolated not only during the experiments but also during the breaks—to prevent blatant cheating as well as more subtle forms of unsanctioned transmission of information—overhearing, side glances, winks, nudges, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">At the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association in 1938 Rhine’s research was awarded a special debate session, called ‘Experimental Methods in ESP Research.’ Here Rhine, one of his statisticians, and the aforementioned psychologist Gardner Murphy were to have a face-off against a board of three keen and incisive critics. A lively exchange took place, and the attendees generally felt that the critics’ objections were successfully addressed. In fact, the meeting ended with a round of applause for Rhine and his colleagues.</p>
<p class="indent">In 1940 Rhine published a new work where he believed he had answered the qualified objections (32 of them, altogether!) that had been raised in the aftermath of his first book. The sequel was called <i>Extra Sensory Perception After Sixty Years</i>. The title hints at a book by the French physician and parapsychologist Charles Richet, namely his <i>Psychic Research After Thirty Years</i> (as mentioned above, Richet had already initiated the use of statistical methods around 1880). Before the book went to print, Rhine had presented the manuscript to all the critics who were quoted and invited them to give their responses that would then be published in the book. This quite unusual move signifies Rhine’s desire for objectivity.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Extra Sensory Perception after Sixty Years</i>—or <i>ESP 60</i>, as its pet name goes—was an immediate success, just as its predecessor. It also entered Harvard’s list of ‘recommended reading’ for psychology students. Along with SPR’s <i>Phantasms of the Living</i>, Rhine’s <i>ESP 60</i> could easily be the most influential ever book on parapsychology.</p>
<p class="indent">Many psychologists found themselves embarrassed by the scientifically rigorous ESP research being conducted at Duke University. On the one hand evidence for the existence of ESP seemed substantial—on the other hand to accept this evidence would break with established perceptions. In 1951, Donald Hebb, the founder of neuropsychology, posed a question to his peers which he answered himself in the next breath:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Why do we not accept ESP as a psychological fact? Rhine has offered enough evidence to have convinced us on almost any other issue… Personally, I do not accept ESP for a moment, because it does not make sense. My external criteria, both of physics and of physiology, say that ESP is not a fact despite the behavioral evidence that has been reported. I cannot see what other basis my colleagues have for rejecting it… Rhine may still turn out to be right, improbable as I think that is, and my own rejection of his view is—in the literal sense—prejudice</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">This is certainly a brave admission from Hebb. But just admitting one’s own resistance is hardly going to further science… In the autobiographical book <i>The Invisible Writing</i> the highly versatile author Arthur Koestler mentions an amusing episode emblematic of the type of shock that could befall a scientist in the slipstream of Rhine’s research:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>In 1952, I met in Princeton an old friend, the late Hans Reichenbach, a leading mathematical logician and Professor of Philosophy at the University of California. I had not seen him for nearly twenty years. He had aged and become partly deaf; instead of a modern hearing aid, he used an old-fashioned ear trumpet. He asked me what I had been interested in lately, and I told him that I had become interested in Rhine’s work on extrasensory perception. He said that it was all hokum, and I said that I did not think so—at least the statistical evaluation of the experiments seemed to show relevant results (meaning that they seemed to confirm the existence of telepathy and kindred phenomena)</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>Reichenbach smiled and asked: ‘Who has checked the statistics?’ I said: ‘R.A. Fisher in person.’ (Fisher is one of the leading contemporary experts in probability calculus.) Reichenbach adjusted his trumpet. ‘Who did you say?’ I yelled into the trumpet: ‘Fisher. The Fisher.’ At that moment an extraordinary change took place in Reichenbach’s face. He went pale, dropped his trumpet and said: ‘If that is true it is terrible, terrible. It would mean that I would have to scrap everything, and start again from the beginning.’ In other words, if extrasensory perception exists, the whole edifice of materialist philosophy crumbles. And for a professional philosopher that means the crumbling of his life’s work</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Ronald Aylmer Fisher (1890–1962) is regarded as one of the most prominent statisticians in the 20th century; in addition he was considered an important biologist—in fact, Richard Dawkins has described him as no less than ‘the greatest biologist after Darwin.’ Reichenbach was certainly no insignificant figure either—a leading contemporary philosopher of science, who made contributions in many fields: quantum mechanics, relativity theory, mathematics, probability theory, logic, and more. Reichenbach was an ardent advocate of <i>logical positivism</i>—a hardnosed philosophical movement, characterized by an unyielding scientific approach to all aspects of life. The above episode is thus a striking (and witty) example of the vise-like grip that even the toughest skeptics could find themselves in when having to deal with the research conducted at Duke.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite huge sales, winning the acclaim of the American Psychological Association, back patting from colleagues and even recognition from multiple opponents, within the course of only a few decades Rhine had fallen out of favor, gradually submerging into <i>Lethe</i>, the river of oblivion, to use the ancient Greek description. Part of the reason was the ‘vagaries of vogue’—the merciless ever-changing currents of fashion. In addition, when World War II broke out Rhine’s lab at Duke lost most of its male staff, who were drafted into military service. And for various reasons—some tragic, some mundane—many did not return after the war. In the post-war period, the pressing issue for society, the universities included, was to repair the damage done. The next step was to counteract the political, technological and military expansion of the Eastern bloc. Parapsychology seemed to have but a faint relevance to the agenda of the day (though this would, to some degree, change later, in the era of Stargate).</p>
<p class="indent">Rhine’s research was also ‘too unique,’ ‘too one of a kind,’ not part of an academic tradition and therefore unable to provide reasonably attractive career opportunities for talented researchers. This problem still haunts the field; the ‘pscientists’ (parapsychologists) often find themselves impeded by extremely small budgets and even less recognition. The physicist Edwin C. May, who for many years was the leader of Stargate and who thus must be regarded as one of the most successful careerists in parapsychology, has issued strong warnings that trying to eke out a living from parapsychology exacts a heavy toll.</p>
<p class="indent">Nonetheless, Rhine at least succeeded in establishing parapsychology as a legitimate branch of scientific research—certainly not with the biggest budgets or with the greatest prestige, but still, how many scientists achieve something similar within their field?</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h158"/>Considerations in Hindsight</p>
<p class="noindent">And what conclusion should we settle on—did Rhine prove ESP to be real or did he not? It seems (hardly any great surprise) to depend on the eyes of the beholder. If one is open to ESP from the outset, one would likely find Rhine’s results to be very convincing. On the other hand, if one starts out as negative toward ESP, one would probably rather attribute the results to potential undetected weaknesses in procedures and methods. Objections that have been expressed are, for instance, the following:</p>
<p class="indent">Do we know for certain that information wasn’t leaked, either by cheating or by carelessness? Do we know that the judges who assessed the results were completely ‘clean’ and not biased (by sympathy or bribery), or were otherwise influenced (by gestures, gaze, tone of voice of colleagues or subjects) in ways that could have colored their assessment? Were the test subjects neutral, or were they interested in achieving specific results? How were the results interpreted? Which factors and elements were emphasized, and which were excluded? And further, there are different statistical methods, and it is not a given which should be used to produce the best assessment, etc., etc.</p>
<p class="indent">As has been said, Rhine thought that he had taken these as well as the bulk of other objections into account in his <i>Extra Sensory Perception After Sixty Years</i>. In more recent times (2007), Elizabeth Lloyd Mayer, professor at Berkeley University (the psychologist with the lost-and-found harp mentioned in <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>), vouched for the quality of Rhine’s research. She further stated that prejudice seems to be an important reason for not accepting the results.</p>
<p class="indent">At the end of <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a> we mentioned that it can sometimes be problematic to discriminate between different types of psi. This also holds true when looking at Rhine’s research, as it is by no means easy to know which parapsychological ability had been at work. Suppose we wanted to test ESP by guessing which cards are placed in sealed envelopes, and our subjects prove to be right far more often than mere chance would suggest. Given that the results are not due to fraud or other faultiness, should they be interpreted as expressions of a) <i>Clairvoyance</i>—meaning that the subjects intuitively have ‘seen’ the cards within the envelopes? Or should they be interpreted as b) <i>Precognition</i>—meaning that the subjects intuitively have ‘seen’ the future in which the envelopes would be opened and the cards checked? Or, if the cards were placed in the envelopes by an assistant who has seen the cards and not by a machine, maybe the symbols were transferred via c) <i>Telepathy</i>—meaning that the receiver ‘read’ the mind of the assistant? Now, this is not easy to know… not easy at all.</p>
<p class="indent">Rhine was aware of these problems but he never fully succeeded in solving them. And what complicates the picture further is, as mentioned in the introduction, that the different psi phenomena can be seen as essentially <i>one</i> phenomenon, namely ‘the transfer of information/energy beyond the common perception of Space, Time and Causality.’</p>
<p class="indent">Even more methodological problems were mentioned in <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>. But as also stated: Parapsychology is often, even by skeptics, thought to hold high scientific standards. This level of quality has been achieved because of the large amount of criticism that parapsychologists have had to deal with. However, some parapsychologists—like some psychologists, some medical researchers, etc.—have unfortunately been tempted to garnish their act. In 1974 Rhine, as always doggedly searching for truth, published an article in which he exposed cases of cheating that he had become aware of. And even his own lab didn’t escape as a young employee at Duke had recently been caught red-handed ‘embellishing’ his statistics on animal psi trials. This had of course absolutely nothing to do with Rhine’s own research 30 years earlier, but it may serve as a reminder of the skeptic’s point: that it is always difficult to be completely sure.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h159"/>A Norwegian Apropos to Rhine’s Experiments</p>
<p class="noindent">Let me mention that Joralf Gjerstad, the Snåsa Man introduced in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>, was once tested somewhat in the manner of Rhine by the defense lawyer Cato Schiøtz—a well-known culture and media personality in Norway. The short version of the event goes like this.</p>
<p class="indent">Together with his friend, the author Ingar Kolloen, Schiøtz visited Gjerstad at home. At the time Kolloen was working on a biography of Gjerstad. After Kolloen had finished his questioning and the two men were about to leave, Gjerstad asked if they had now asked about <i>everything</i> they wanted to know—emphasizing the word <i>everything</i>. Schiøtz felt his chance had come, as he had secretly hoped to run a little clairvoyance test with Gjerstad. To that effect Schiøtz had, before leaving home, randomly and face down, drawn a card from a standard pack of 52. He had purposely avoided looking at the card thus making it impossible for Gjerstad to trick him into disclosing its identity using, say, leading questions or cold reading. Schiøtz asked if Gjerstad was willing to demonstrate his abilities and—this turned out to be one of the few occasions where Gjerstad, who mostly refuses to participate in any kind of ‘party tricks,’ chose to play along.</p>
<p class="indent">Schiøtz first placed the card (face down!) on the table in front of Gjerstad, who jotted and scribbled a little, considering a couple of options, and then wrote down his shot. The card was turned and—it was a hit! From pure chance, the probability for this to occur is obviously 1/52. Not completely impossible odds, of course, but it seems weird that Gjerstad proved able to deliver such a hit on demand. I have discussed the incident with Schiøtz, who assured me that he was in full control of the card during the process, and that Gjerstad, in fact, never got to touch it at all. Schiøtz therefore thinks one can rule out palmistry and sleight-of-hand, and believes it must have been either a matter of luck or of ESP. Following an overall assessment, including similar stories reported by others, based on his comprehensive experience and the criteria employed in a courtroom, Schiøtz believes that in a trial Gjerstad would have been found guilty—beyond reasonable doubt—of being psychic!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h160"/>Dream Telepathy—Our Nocturnal Communications</p>
<p class="bq"><i>These disturbing phenomena seem to deny all our scientific ideas. How we should like to discredit them! Unfortunately the statistical evidence, at least for telepathy, is overwhelming</i></p>
<p class="bq1">~ Alan Turing, mathematician and logician; pioneer in computer science and artificial intelligence</p>
<p class="noindent">In the introduction we quoted from a 1922 article by Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, where he claimed it to be ‘an undeniable fact that sleep creates favorable conditions for telepathy.’ It would take several decades, though, before technological developments, coupled with an increased interest in altered states of consciousness—sown by the Beat Generation, brought to fruition by the hippies—made it feasible to put Freud’s claim to the test. The summer of 1964 saw the beginning of what would become a decade of pioneering, systematic research on dream telepathy, conducted at the renowned Maimonides Medical Center in New York. The key researchers were psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Montague Ullman (1916–2008) and psychologist Stanley Krippner (b. 1932). Ullman was, in keeping with his psychoanalytic background, an expert on dreams, and has written diverse books on the subject. For a period Ullman was chairman of ASPR, the American Society for Psychical Research. We have made Krippner’s acquaintance already, but in a rather superficial way. Now it seems appropriate to elaborate.</p>
<p class="indent">Stanley Krippner is an internationally recognized expert on dreams, hypnosis and altered states of consciousness. He has also been doing in-depth research on shamanism, including what takes place, psychologically, physiologically and chemically, in the brain in the event of trances and trauma. Krippner has been editor for a whole lot of works on psychology, and has, as author and co-author, published about 20 books. Furthermore, he has written almost a thousand articles! Krippner has been head of two divisions of the American Psychological Association, and he has received several prestigious awards for his work. He is often regarded as the ‘grand old man’ of contemporary parapsychology, and is, so it seems, held in high regard by almost everybody. Even the arch-skeptic, James Randi, has respect for ‘Stan’ and his integrity, and once stated: ‘There are so few things in this field you can depend on, and there are so many people who are prejudiced and biased. But I can depend on Stan. And I don’t think he’s biased at all.’ Truly a strong statement!</p>
<p class="indent">Krippner has a liberal lifestyle and hangs out on a regular basis with fringe-dwellers of all kinds, shamans, artists and musicians, and he is also open about his philosophical use of entheogens, psychoactive plants, as, for example, the concoction <i>ayahuasca</i>, used by shamans of the Amazon. But in his professional assessments Krippner is extremely sober—almost annoyingly sober, one might think, when knowing just a little about all the exciting things in which he has been involved. For instance, he was a good friend of Jerry Garcia, the leader of the cult band Grateful Dead. Once he hypnotized the band’s two drummers to make them more rhythmically coordinated! (They were happy with the result, reportedly having been enabled to interact as one.) Krippner has also conducted exciting group telepathy experiments at their concerts.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h161"/>From the Dream Lab</p>
<p class="noindent">The Maimonides experiments covered different aspects of nocturnal ESP, one example was the ability to see the future in dreams. But the primary aim was to investigate whether it would be possible for a person (‘sender’) to telepathically transmit his/her thoughts to another person lying asleep (‘receiver’). A long series of tests seemingly showed there was a remarkably high degree of correlation between the thoughts ‘sent’ and the thoughts ‘received.’ Thus the awake person was, so it seemed, able to telepathically affect the dreams of the sleeper! Important results from the trials were published in <i>Dream Telepathy: Experiments in Nocturnal ESP</i> (1974)—a work which is considered by many to be epochal, and which has been re-released in several editions.</p>
<p class="indent">The experiment protocols varied through the years—one procedure used was this: First, two subjects are assigned the roles as respectively ‘Sender’ and ‘Receiver.’ Secondly, these two spend some time together, say, going downtown for dinner to get to know each other and to get ‘in tune.’ Back in the lab they are ushered to separate rooms. The Receiver’s room is soundproof and electromagnetically shielded to prevent ‘normal’ transfer of information. The Receiver is connected to equipment registering REM sleep (REM = Rapid Eye Movements, referring to the small, very fast eye movements that occur while dreaming). The Receiver then goes to sleep.</p>
<p class="indent">Meanwhile, the researchers have prepared a stack of photographs/prints of diverse artwork—often these will be pictures with lively colors and/or depicting intense emotions. Based on dice-throwing the researchers select one of these photographs, which is then placed in an opaque envelope and given to the Sender.</p>
<p class="indent">When the equipment shows that the Receiver is in REM sleep, indicative of dreaming, the researchers tell the Sender (who, as said, is placed in a different room) to open the envelope, take out the photo and start ‘sending’ the content of the photograph to the dreaming Receiver. After some minutes of telepathic transmission, the Receiver is awakened and is immediately asked about the dream. The Receiver’s description of his/her dream is both recorded on tape and written down. Let’s now have a look at some of the material from <i>Dream Telepathy</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">In one case the Sender tried to telepathically transmit the <i>School of Dance</i> by the French painter Edgar Degas. The painting depicts a group of girls having a ballet lesson. When the Receiver, the dreamer, was awakened she related: ‘I was in a class made up of maybe half a dozen people, it felt like a school,’ and ‘There was one little girl that was trying to dance with me.’ It in fact seems like a number of elements in the image that the Sender tried to transmit resurfaced in the dream of the Receiver, e.g. ‘group,’ ‘school,’ ‘girl,’ ‘dance.’</p>
<p class="indent">In another case (when a somewhat different procedure was used) the Sender tried to make a telepathic transfer of <i>The Church at Auvers</i>, a painting by Vincent van Gogh. This painting depicts an old, grey stone church and a woman walking on a cobblestoned street outside. The Receiver, after having been awakened in the middle of the dream, said:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I was dreaming of…Europe. We came to this building. I think it was a dome or something. It was a very old building. It could have been a church. […] We went into this great hall, and there was the little old lady speaking… I remember walking down a street …and it was cobblestone…I remember a lot of grey from the buildings…. I think it was a church or something…</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Again, it seems that diverse key elements in the image appeared in the dream: ‘Europe,’ ‘old building,’ ‘church,’ ‘cobblestone,’ ‘lady’ (albeit placed inside the church), ‘much grey.’</p>
<p class="indent">After the experiment, the Receiver’s taped and written dream report as well as copies of the full stack of photos were passed on to three independent judges—psychologists experienced in the interpretation of perception and imagery, and who also know the relevant statistics (say, of how often different elements occur in people’s dreams, etc.). The degree of correspondence between the dream and the ‘telepathed’ photo was evaluated on a scale from 1 to 6. This assessment was done according to a complex routine involving interviewing the test subjects. In the introduction to the third edition of <i>Dream Telepathy</i> Krippner states that approximately two-thirds of the trials yielded significant results, meaning results better than one would expect from mere chance. As the trials were conducted over many years the hypothesis about telepathy in dreams apparently was well corroborated. Or, as skeptics would rather say, the methods apparently were seriously flawed.</p>
<p class="indent">As mentioned in <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>, it is quite problematic to claim that anything, really, has been completely proven, as there could almost always—someplace, somewhere—be a hitherto undetected source of error. Krippner is therefore circumspect about making extravagant claims. Hence he states his positive assessment indirectly by saying that the hit score was so high ‘that coincidence was unlikely.’</p>
<p class="indent">In more recent times (2004) Krippner has again spoken in defense of the Maimonides trials, claiming they were conducted with better methods than reference experiments in the field (visual interpretation and pattern recognition). The objection he considers to have the most bearing is that other scientists rarely get similar good results; that is, replication has often been unsuccessful. In the previous chapter we assumed that an optimal functioning of such sensitive capacities as these (if at all real) will depend just as much, or probably even more, on the qualities—enthusiasm, encouragement, etc.—of the ‘coach.’ The researchers are difficult, or even impossible, to factor out of the experiment, as they—with their attitudes, moods, words, and actions—will unavoidably influence the test subjects, and thereby most likely also their performance, to a certain degree.</p>
<p class="indent">So, perhaps the difficulty in getting results similar to those of Ullman and Krippner might be due to such factors—that very few scientists are equally motivating and inspiring to work with as they were. Before Egil ‘Drillo’ Olsen became coach for the Norwegian soccer team in the 1990s, very few had ever thought it possible for little Norway to reach second place on the FIFA world ranking, even beating the mighty Brazil in two face-offs, in 1997 and 1998.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h162"/>Assessment by Others</p>
<p class="noindent">The positive assessment of the Maimonides experiments is shared by other respected professionals. In 1985, in the November issue of <i>American Psychologist</i>, Professor Irvin Child, former head of the Department of Psychology at Yale University, published an article called ‘Psychology and Anomalous Observations: The Question of ESP in Dreams,’ which was mainly based on a thorough analysis of the Ullman and Krippner trials. And Child’s conclusion coincided largely with their assessment. In some series of experiments there was, according to Child, less than one-thousandth of a chance that the results could be coincidental!</p>
<p class="indent">Child’s article was published in <i>American Psychologist</i>, often considered to be the most prestigious journal in American psychology, which therefore lent extra gravitas to the work. But of course, not everybody was eager to consider the possibility that the significant deviations might be due to telepathy. In the ensuing debate several critics claimed—some in quite a cocksure way—that the results were expressions of this or that (still undetected) error in the experiments. Child wrote a quite biting counterattack, stating that some of the criticism was irrelevant, while much of the other analysis was based on an incorrect or distorted representation of the trials. Child was certainly not prone to hyperbole and expressed his view in the following understated manner:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I believe many psychologists would, like myself, consider the ESP hypothesis to merit serious consideration and continued research if they read the Maimonides reports for themselves and if they familiarized themselves with other recent and older lines of experimentation</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Well, then, with whom should we join forces?—the skeptics who consider the trials conducted by Ullman and Krippner to be lacking in methodological rigor, and regard dream telepathy as all ‘woo-woo’? Or rather with Child, who chose to merit the idea of dream telepathy with serious consideration? The last alternative—which certainly appears to be the most exciting—would also be in keeping with the many esoteric traditions which have described this phenomenon, e.g. the Kabbalah, the Jewish mysticism, where even specific techniques for communicating via dream telepathy are cultivated! Are such ideas just based on mistakes, misunderstandings, misconceptions, misapprehensions, and misinterpretations? Or could their basis rather be the experience of generations with <i>real</i> nocturnal communications mediated via the collective field of consciousness, the Mental Internet?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h163"/>The Ganzfeld—the Lab’s Monastic Cell</p>
<p class="noindent">From the late 1960s on much research has been conducted in parapsychology with experimentation related to the ‘ganzfeld effect.’ The German word <i>ganzfeld</i> means ‘total field’ and originally referred to the field of vision. The ganzfeld effect will sometimes occur naturally when for an extended period of time we look at, say, a snow-covered, all-white plain, or if we stare into a completely dark room. After a while the brain will start to miss the usual visual signals and ‘look inwards’ to compensate. Thus the so-called ‘neural noise,’ the brain’s continuous inner ‘hum,’ will come to the forefront. This may sometimes lead to hallucinations. But amidst this well-known psycho-physiological noise there may also, according to many parapsychologists, pop up some genuinely ‘anarchistic’ mental content, namely bits of information originating from ESP (telepathy, clairvoyance or precognition). An important pioneer in this special field of research was Charles Honorton (1946–1992). Honorton started out working with Rhine at Duke, and then later collaborated with Krippner and Ullman at the dream lab at Maimonides where he eventually became head of research. Subsequently, in 1979, he established the Psychophysical Research Laboratories (PRL), in Princeton, New Jersey.</p>
<p class="indent">A ganzfeld experiment will try to utilize the above-mentioned effect by creating a setup somewhat like the following: the test subject is reclining in a soundproof room wearing headphones playing ‘white noise’—diffuse and pleasant sounds, e.g. nature sounds like trickling rain, whispering winds, or breaking waves. The room is dimly lit, perhaps in soothing pink, and the subject’s eyes are covered with special goggles (originally ping pong balls cut in half were used). The idea is, as mentioned, to reduce the sensory input from outside as much as possible. Thus ensconced, the test subject becomes more sensitive to subtle inner sensations possibly containing elements coming from extrasensory perception.</p>
<p class="indent">This works in the same way as getting all the instruments in an orchestra to play more quietly except for, say, the flutes; in which case the flutes will be more easily heard. Something similar would also happen if you had just the flutes—and none of the other instruments—play louder. This is comparable to the strategy used by Alan Parker in his twin-telepathy experiment (end of <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>) where small shocks were used to increase the signals emitting from Vicky (‘increasing the volume of the flutes’). But in most cases it will be easier and less painful to dampen ‘the orchestra’—reduce distractions from vision, hearing, odors, movements, etc.—as is done in the typical ganzfeld experiments.</p>
<p class="indent">A related approach has since days of old been used by mystics in many traditions. ‘Mystic’ is derived from the Greek word <i>myein</i>, meaning ‘closing’ (of the eyes). Mystics will often spend a great amount of time praying and meditating isolated in hermit huts, subterranean initiation chambers, caves, monastic cells and the like. In this way they significantly reduce sensory input—little or no visual impressions, noise from the marketplace, etc. This partial sense deprivation will often be combined with fasting and vigils. These techniques, especially when combined, may easily cause visions/hallucinations—which really is dreaming while awake, subconscious material entering into consciousness—and experiences of psi, as is well known, have often been reported.</p>
<p class="indent">In some sense we are all mystics and parapsychologists, each night entering our own initiation cave to engage profoundly in ganzfeld experiments! During sleep we are deprived of outward sensations to a great extent, thus turning down ‘the orchestra’ allowing ‘the flutes’ to more clearly emerge. But of course, our DIY experiments during sleep do not allow for the same degree of observation or active collaboration with researchers. Experimenting in a ganzfeld setup as sketched above is also by far and away the most efficient way to go about researching telepathy, making it possible to send/receive whole series of pictures during a short stint. In contrast, the experiments conducted by Krippner and Ullman were utterly time-consuming: a whole evening was needed trying to send/receive just one single image. The disadvantage of doing experiments where the receiver is awake is of course that most people will not be as relaxed and as receptive as when sleeping. (Some experienced meditators are an exception to this rule.)</p>
<p class="indent">Experiments with telepathy in the ganzfeld can be conducted in many ways. However, protocols where the essence is trying to send/receive images are the most widespread. The most vocal proponent of ganzfeld experiments today is likely Dean Radin, head of research at the Institute of Noetic Sciences. Radin’s stock-in-trade, in addition to his own research, is the so-called meta-analysis—‘doing research on research done.’ In that connection Radin has spent a tremendous amount of time reviewing different studies from parapsychological labs around the world. The ganzfeld studies alone number about 2,500 and counting! Having worked his way through piles and piles of material leaves Radin convinced:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>We are fully justified in having very high confidence that people sometimes get small amounts of specific information from a distance without the use of the ordinary senses. Psi effects do occur in the ganzfeld</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><a id="h164"/>Prescient Soldiers and Civilians</p>
<p class="noindent">In his own research Radin has, among other things, worked with precognition. The idea for a novel experiment design was conceived while Radin was a Visiting Fellow at the University of Edinburgh, in 1993, where he helped building a laboratory for testing telepathy. Experiments were conducted somewhat later, in 1993–97, while he ran a psi laboratory at the University of Nevada. Rather than being the preserve of psychics, could precognition be a universal ability? Radin tested this hypothesis by connecting soldiers, used as guinea pigs, to equipment measuring their skin’s resistance to electricity—often referred to as ‘skin conductivity.’ When a person becomes afraid a spontaneous secretion of microscopic drops of sweat takes place, and this moisture immediately decreases the skin’s resistance to electricity. Thus changes in a person’s level of stress can easily be detected.</p>
<p class="indent">Radin had the soldiers watch a screen that would—with pauses of some seconds in between—alternately show pictures with neutral, markedly pleasant, and markedly frightening scenes. And what transpired was, according to Radin, that the soldiers would often get a change in conductivity a few—typically two to five—seconds <i>before</i> either a scary or a pleasurable image appeared! Radin thought that the ‘gut feeling’ that had helped the soldiers survive in the field might actually be based on genuine knowing/perception of the future and that this would strengthen his hypothesis (pre-cognition = fore-knowledge). Scary pictures would create the strongest responses. This makes evolutionary good sense, as it is more urgent to be forewarned of a hungry lion coming your way than of, say, an attractive man/woman. (Chances for mating will most likely appear again—as long as you manage to avoid being eaten by the lion!)</p>
<p class="indent">Skeptics would of course think that such results are either caused by faulty devices, or that the pictorial material was not random enough, or that other unidentified methodological faults are lurking somewhere in the protocols. However, serious scientists have been intrigued by Radin’s results, thinking something of real interest is going on here. One such scientist is Kary B. Mullis—one of the really trailblazing chemists of our days, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1993. Mullis wanted to be tested with the same equipment as the soldiers. He has commented on his experience in hindsight, and has then stated:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I sat wired up in front of Radin’s machine myself one morning. I was intrigued. My skin conductivity could respond, not every time, but a statistically significant percentage of the time, to what sort of stimulus his absolutely random machine was going to present to me. […] Radin is addressing something to do with human minds on our time scale; whether our minds are really localized in space and time, like we normally think of them. […] He is demonstrating an empirical fact, a strange and unexpected property of things, on a scale of seconds, with which we are personally familiar, and he is doing it in a technically convincing way. I don’t know what it means, that’s why it’s intriguing</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>I could see about three seconds into the future. It’s spooky. You sit there and watch this little trace, and about three seconds, on average, before the picture comes on, you have a little response in your skin conductivity which is in the same direction that a large response occurs after you see the picture. Some pictures make you have a rise in conductivity, some make you have a fall. […] There’s something funny about time that we don’t understand because you shouldn’t be able to do that</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">The physicist and psychologist Professor Dick J. Bierman at the University of Amsterdam has conducted upgraded reiterations of Radin’s experiments. Bierman used advanced brain scans, fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging. He further applied extensive and rigorous evaluation methods so as to neutralize sources of errors of all kinds. And Bierman’s results came in congruent with Radin’s: they indicated that ordinary people—and not only those that are psychics, long-time meditators and/or mystics—really are capable of ESP-based foresight! Links to scientific articles describing the experiments are found in the bibliography.</p>
<p class="indent">I once had a conversation with a professional rock blaster, and what he told me fits well with Radin’s and Bierman’s belief: that precognition is an ability we are subconsciously using all time. He related an incident where he was about 500ft (150m) away from what was intended to be a controlled explosion. Then—simultaneously as the explosives detonated—he suddenly and without thinking found himself swirling around 180 degrees and covering the back of his head with his hands. And in the next moment those hands were struck by chips of stone that could easily have crushed his skull! It was the first time in his career he had done something like this. What, then, was behind his utterly timely swirl—subtle physical signals or paranormal foresight? Who knows? But surely, this episode is easily the epitome of the kind of life-saving ESP prescience that Radin and Bierman have tried to elucidate in their experiments.</p>
<p class="indent">Radin believes that the key to explaining precognition could be the ‘time-symmetry of quantum events.’ This is a complex notion from quantum theory whose essence is that ultra small-scale events—as, say, an electron moving through an electromagnetic field—will look exactly the same whether time is moving forwards or backwards. Perhaps time-independent processes are also going on in the brain and that precognition simply is our conscious experience of those processes? Radin thinks (something like) this to be the case. Needless to say, skeptics do not agree.</p>
<p class="indent">Personally I don’t feel competent to make judgments about such complicated matters, but Radin’s surely is an interesting idea. Anyway, I think the walk might be more important than the talk, meaning that Radin’s enthralling experiments could prove to be more important than his explanatory models. Often strange facts are detected first whereas a proper explanation is found long afterwards. For thousands of years people had observed those tiny flames—burning meteorites—crossing the night sky without understanding their true cause or nature; modern astronomy had to develop before that riddle was solved. Electricity as a phenomenon was discovered by the ancient Greeks and Mesopotamians, but was not explained properly until Maxwell came along with his revolutionary equations around the mid-19th century.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h165"/>More About Precognition—What Students Can Predict…</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h166"/>Feeling the Future</p>
<p class="noindent">Quite a number of psychologists probably choked on their coffee when opening the <i>Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</i> during March 2011. Because what met the eye in this most orthodox of magazines was a most heretical headline: ‘Feeling the Future: Experimental Evidence for Anomalous Retroactive Influences on Cognition and Affect.’ This extraordinary article, written by Daryl Bem, an internationally respected psychologist tenured at Cornell University, presents evidence suggesting that humans do, in fact, see/perceive the future! ‘Feeling the Future’ presents nine experiments that were conducted with volunteer students. Bem believes the results from eight of these experiments to be suggestive of precognition/premonition. ‘Precognition’ (cognitive; specific knowledge regarding the future) and ‘premonition’ (affective; general sensations regarding the future) overlap and both are variants of foresight based on ESP. ‘Feeling the Future’ contains quite a lot of demanding (at least for a lay person) statistics, but there are some accessible parts as well, accompanied by Bem’s subtly jocular comments.</p>
<p class="indent">‘Feeling the Future’ created euphoria in psi positive environments and shockwaves among skeptics because Bem is a psychologist of high esteem who has taught at major academic institutions including Harvard. And not least because the magazine that printed the article is among the most respected, peer-reviewed psychology journals in the world. The <i>Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</i> is published by APA, the American Psychological Association, and submitted articles must be approved not only by the journal’s own editors but also by four external peers. Professor Charles Judd, who oversaw the approval process for ‘Feeling the Future,’ has stated: ‘This paper went through a series of reviews from some of our most trusted reviewers.’</p>
<p class="indent">With this article Bem really stomped on the hornet’s nest—for which rational person in his/her right mind would believe in such fairytale stuff?—and ‘Feeling the Future’ has spawned an aftermath of feuding (as well as valuable and thoughtful research). Some critics have even attacked the journal for presenting such eccentric ideas (so much for freedom of research…). Early on, the well-known skeptic James Alcock had a heated debate with Bem in <i>Skeptical Inquirer</i>. Shortly thereafter the psychologists/skeptics Chris French and Richard Wiseman issued three replications of one of Bem’s nine experiments, the results not being indicative of any precognition whatsoever. The ensuing years have seen much further debate as well as many replications, some successful, some not. Together with three colleagues Bem recently (2014) did a meta-analysis of no fewer than 90 replicated experiments, and—the original conclusions from ‘Feeling the Future’ were corroborated. Bem’s original article, the meta-analysis and other relevant material are easily available (though not as easily readable…) from his website at Cornell University: <a href="http://dbem.ws/">http://dbem.ws/</a></p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h167"/>Precognitive Detection of Erotic Stimuli</p>
<p class="noindent">In the first experiment, called ‘Precognitive Detection of Erotic Stimuli,’ the ‘guinea pig students’ were presented with a screen displaying two curtains; these could be ‘drawn aside’ by pressing buttons. The students were told that behind one of the drapes there would be a positively charged image; the computer—that sly dog!—would use highly erotic photographs as bait to awaken the students’ precognitive sense. Behind the other curtain, however, there would be nothing exciting. The students’ task was, as one would expect, to locate the steamy picture. For this to be a test of <i>precognition</i> none of the images—neither the exciting nor the neutral—were present ‘behind the curtains’ when the experiment started. Instead, the computer chose which images should be displayed <i>immediately after</i> the students had made their choice. This meant that the students’ detection of erotic stimuli would relate to an event in the immediate future (meaning they had to use precognition) and not something already present (in which case they would have been using clairvoyance).</p>
<p class="indent">Bem employed computerized randomization in the experiments—to thwart the possibility of finding answers by, say, shrewd reasoning, detection of subtle clues, cold reading or other tricks in the magicians’ repertoire. And by the way, Bem is himself not only a world-renowned psychologist but also an experienced magician and mentalist. Originally he was an ardent skeptic, but eventually he became convinced of the reality of psi following a thorough evaluation of a series of ganzfeld experiments conducted by Charles Honorton (briefly mentioned above).</p>
<p class="indent">Bem ran this experiment with 100 different students, 50 of each gender, and performed 36 tests with each student, totaling 3,600 attempts. It turned out that even with randomization in place the students still had the correct hunch about where the eroticism would appear in a majority of the cases! Those students…</p>
<p class="indent">The students would on average score 53.1 percent of the time, which may not sound all that impressive. But in a test where the method is specifically designed to eliminate coincidences and a hit rate very close to 50 percent is to be expected—given that no x-factors, as for instance precognition or cheating, are in the picture—a deviation this size is considered to be both certain and important. In a casino the roulette has about this edge versus the players (the casino will win 53 percent and the players 47 percent of the time). And as Bem said in an interview: ‘[…] casinos are not complaining that that is too small […] They are making plenty of money with that edge.’</p>
<p class="indent">As mentioned above: A full eight out of Bem’s nine experiments yielded results, suggesting the students had used ESP to know the future. Therefore, according to Bem, these trials taken together clearly provide the psi hypothesis with more than just a scant evidence base. Bem has analyzed the probability for getting a similar outcome given that precognition does not exist. He found that mere chance would yield a similar result in only one out of 74 billion cases! This sounds quite extraordinary to me, but then I’m only an amateur…</p>
<p class="indent">In addition to describing experiments and methods, ‘Feeling the Future’ also suggests possible perspectives from physics and biology that provide a relevant framework for understanding psi. Bem is also one of those who believe that psi works unconsciously, running as a kind of background program beneath our everyday perceptions—to help us avoid dangers and gain happiness, e.g. find suitable partners. This seems reasonable from an evolutionary perspective; psi would then be an ancient mechanism helping us to be more ‘fit for survival.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h168"/>Mulling Over the Method</p>
<p class="noindent">Some of the strength in Bem’s trials is that they are based on well-established methods in psychological research, with just some small alterations to make them suitable for testing precognition. For example Bem created a variation on a standard memory experiment. In the classical version the subjects are first shown a list of words on a computer screen. Then they are shown another list that contains half the words from the first list, and are asked to type these words. Finally the screen is blanked, and the subjects are now asked to type as many words as they can possibly remember from the first list. Evidently, the subjects remember more of the words they have typed during the second step. Typing the words makes them easier to remember. No big deal, really.</p>
<p class="indent">In Bem’s version of the experiment the order between cause and effect was changed. First, a group of students were shown a list of 48 words and asked to remember as many as they could. Second, they were shown a list of 24 words that had been randomly selected from the first list, and were asked to type these words. When evaluating the results it, quite surprisingly, turned out that the students were significantly better at remembering the words (in the first round) that they later chose to type (in the second round)! Thus the well-known memory-reinforcing effect of typing the words apparently worked backward in time. This conclusion is of course utterly confusing and highly counterintuitive! But Bem’s methods are generally thought to be sound, which was the main reason the <i>Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</i> accepted his article.</p>
<p class="indent">To formulate the idea a little differently: Perhaps the explanation could be—if precognition is possible—that the students in the first round would ‘see’ (by precognition) which 24 words they were going to type in the second round. And that this foresight made it easier for them recognize and remember precisely <i>those</i> words when they were displayed during the first round.</p>
<p class="indent">Truly, it is interesting—and in my opinion praiseworthy—that a leading journal would ‘run the risk of ridicule’ by publishing such odd stuff. Charles Judd, the aforementioned editor, said in an interview on the eve of the release (the rumor went that the article would contain explosive material):</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>What makes these findings so remarkable and certainly controversial is that they turn our traditional understanding of causality on its head […] A central assumption in lay and scientific conceptions of causality is that a cause precedes its effect, not the other way round</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Even if Bem reached weird conclusions, Judd and the other peers believed the arguments and the data to be ‘well done’—hence he felt the journal had no valid reason to refrain from publishing the article. This, though, is not to say that they shared Bem’s opinions: ‘This does not mean we agree with his conclusions. We are not endorsing what Daryl Bem says.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h169"/>The Confusing Relationship Between Cause and Effect</p>
<p class="noindent">Retro-causation, even if sounding somewhat sci-fi, is a very old idea. For instance the Arabian collection of fairytales <i>One Thousand and One Nights</i> repeatedly weaves retro-causality into the fabric of the stories. In one story the Caliph in Baghdad, Harun al-Rashid, opens a book his library, the <i>Beit al-Hakim</i> (<i>The House of Wisdom</i>), and reads a tale. Suddenly he falls to the ground, laughing and weeping, and for no apparent reason dismisses his faithful vizier, Ja’far, from sight. Ja’far flees town and gets involved in a series of adventures. After returning to Baghdad, Ja’far reads the book that made the Caliph dismiss him and discovers that it, in fact, describes Ja’far’s own adventures! So, the story in the book apparently caused its own fulfilment. But, could it have brought this about if it hadn’t been a true precognition? Since Ja’far initially hadn’t read the book he obviously wasn’t able to turn the story into a self-fulfilling prophecy. So what comes first here, what is cause and what is effect? … a bit confusing. Anyway, I guess many of us would have been curious to have a peek at that book!</p>
<p class="indent">Retro-causality is today often invoked in connection with time travel. The sci-fi comedy <i>Back to the Future</i> deals with and delves into variants of the so-called ‘grandfather paradox.’ Imagine you build a time machine, travel back in time, meet your grandfather and kill him before he begets your father/mother. Thus you will not be born, the time machine will not be built, and you will not kill your grandfather. But because of this you are—in fact—going to be born, build the time machine, meet your grandfather and kill him. Thus you will not be born… but, hey…?!</p>
<p class="indent">But retro-causality is certainly not only of interest to storytellers, film directors and maverick scientists; even the venerable American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) has given its attention to the subject. In June 2006 a seminar was arranged for physicists and psi researchers where the theme was the physics of time and retro-causation. This symposium was sponsored by the AAAS which afterwards published the proceedings in a book, <i>Frontiers of Time: Retrocausation—Experiment and Theory</i> (D.P. Sheenan, ed.). At the conference there appears to have been consensus that fundamental laws of physics are time-symmetric (e.g. as far as quantum processes are concerned, time could just as well go backwards as forwards), and it thus ‘seems untenable to assert that time-reverse causation (retrocausation) cannot occur.’ This is also, as we have learned, the position of Radin, Bierman and Bem.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h170"/>Bayesian Brawl</p>
<p class="noindent">The most thorough critique of ‘Feeling the Future’ has come from psychologist and statistician Eric-Jan Wagenmakers at the University of Amsterdam. Bem’s analysis is misleading, Wagenmakers contends, because his statistical methods are not ‘fit for the job.’ Wagenmakers worked his way through Bem’s numbers applying so-called Bayesian statistics—a method for weighing and interpreting data with uncertainties attached to them. Some think of the Bayesian method as almost a revelation, while its critics see it as little more than truisms poshed-up with complex equations. An excellent and funny intro to ‘the Bayesian thing’ can be found at: <a href="https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/bayes-s-theorem-what-s-the-big-deal">https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/bayes-s-theorem-what-s-the-big-deal</a></p>
<p class="indent">Well, then, using the Bayesian system, Wagenmakers did not find Bem’s data to be suggestive of precognition. He says: ‘Evidence is a relative concept, and although some data may be unlikely under one hypothesis, this does not mean that therefore we should accept the other.’ Simply put, even if Bem may have demonstrated that chance does not readily account for his findings, this does not mean we should immediately accept the psi-hypothesis.</p>
<p class="indent">Wagenmakers’ attack would have been a serious blow to many a strong hypothesis. But precognition bobbed and weaved and struck back forcefully. Bem invited two experts on Bayesian statistics to his corner; together they did a second Bayesian analysis, and before long precognition was again ruling the ring! If I understand Bem correctly, he thinks Wagenmakers had set an unrealistically high bar for how strong a psi effect must be before it can be counted as significant. It is often said that ‘extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence.’ But exactly <i>how</i> extraordinary the evidence should be is of course difficult to decide.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h171"/>The White Queen, Alice and Us</p>
<p class="noindent">Bem rounds out ‘Feeling the Future’ with a <i>coda</i> containing some amusing references to <i>Through the Looking Glass, and What Alice Found There</i> by Lewis Carroll. Apart from being a writer, the versatile Carroll was a theologian, mathematician, logician, inventor and a photographer, and in his highly personal way he delved deeply into questions of both time and the paranormal (and as mentioned in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>, he was a member of the Society for Psychical Research). Bem quotes from a scene where Alice has an encounter with the White Queen, who is ‘living backwards,’ meaning she is experiencing time as running in the opposite direction, from the future to the past. The Queen tells Alice that living this way ‘always makes one a little giddy at first,’ but that the advantage is that you will have a memory that works both backwards and forwards. Alice, however, has—at least as far as she knows—no such memory: ‘I’m sure mine only works one way,’ Alice remarked. ‘I can’t remember things before they happen.’ The Queen then declares: ‘It’s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards.’ I think the Queen’s point here is that time does not necessarily limit the scope of our consciousness. And precognition is clearly integrated in the sort of ‘re-collection’ that the Queen has (and that we perhaps have too?), as her mind is able to collect information from both past and future.</p>
<p class="indent">Bem closes his article with a dialogue where Alice confides to the Queen that she has an inability to believe impossible things. The Queen, however, is having none of that, and gives Alice an almost scathing reply: ‘I daresay you haven’t had much practice,’ said the Queen. ‘When I was your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast.’ In contrast to the White Queen Bem is not asking his colleagues (or us) to believe impossible things. But teasingly he assumes that perhaps reading ‘Feeling the Future’ will prompt those psychologists who haven’t excluded psi from the outset to raise their ‘posterior probabilities’—a joke on statistical terms, which refers to how in hindsight one reassesses the probability of something—of believing at least one anomalous thing (precognition, that is) before breakfast!</p>
<p class="indent">Bem has constructed the experiments so as to be easily replicable, and if you wish to try them out yourself you may contact Bem directly via his website and get ‘replication-packages’ for both Mac and Windows—for free. If you should be a teacher in high school, at college or university I would think this could make for an exciting and sobriety twisting scientific project to carry out in cooperation with your students.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h172"/>Some Time-Out Thoughts on Time</p>
<p class="bq"><i>For what is time? Who can readily and briefly explain this? Who can even in thought comprehend it, so as to utter a word about it? But what in discourse do we mention more familiarly and knowingly, than time? And, we understand, when we speak of it; we understand also, when we hear it spoken of by another. What then is time? If no one asks me, I know: if I wish to explain it to one that asketh, I know not</i> […]</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Saint Augustine, <i>Confessions</i> Book XI</p>
<p class="noindent">Time is truly one of the great mysteries of existence from physical, psychological and philosophical perspectives, giving the philosophers and scientists manes of grey hair. Henri Bergson, French philosopher and Nobel laureate, said that grasping time is possible only by intuition and not by reason. Our maps won’t fit the territory and inevitably we confuse the menu with the meal, as Zen master Alan Watts said. The word is never the thing; it is just ‘a finger pointing to the moon.’ And according to Jean-Jacques Rousseau, our concepts tend to cover the world like a film, often hiding reality rather than revealing it. So perhaps I had better stop right here before confusing things even more… But as to be human is to share, I shall convey some very simple ‘time-out thoughts’ on time and it wouldn’t surprise me to find that they mirror some of the reader’s own thoughts (in which case we both will feel a little less alone).</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h173"/>Time—Real or Not?</p>
<p class="noindent">When dreaming, many of us probably have had the experience of understanding something profound, but then, when waking up and trying to grasp our newly won insight and place it in the constraints of language, it slips through our fingers, becomes vague, evaporates. And suddenly, the insight, and maybe even the memory of what the dream was about, has slid back into the murky depths of the subconscious from where it first arose, leaving us with nothing more than a feeling of having been touched by ‘meaning.’ It could easily have been an experience of just this sort that impelled Salvador Dalí to create his famous painting <i>The Persistence of Memory</i>. This painting, with which many readers will be familiar, displays a dreamlike landscape with an enigmatic, sleeping figure (which is probably a representation of the artist himself) in the middle ground, and a few mysterious objects scattered about, including three watches, melted and deformed. Dali seemingly managed to capture the insight he had glimpsed: using his artistic intuition he appears to have perceived that behind the structuring of consciousness there is no time.</p>
<p class="indent">However, common sense, and also most philosophy throughout history, considers time to be objectively and harshly real, an integrated part of our physical reality. But exceptions exist. As mentioned in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>, Parmenides had completely other ideas; his <i>grand thesis</i> being ‘It is’! The totality of Being—past, present, future—IS, while change, becoming and time are but illusions caused by the flimsiness of the senses. And in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a> we saw that Immanuel Kant, the Enlightenment’s greatest philosopher, was convinced that time does not belong to the physical world at all, it isn’t ‘out there’ but is a creation of consciousness—a ‘matrix,’ an arrangement made by the mind to give structure to our world. Because of Kant’s enormous impact much philosophy and physics, especially in Germany, would hereafter have a Kantian slant to it, suggesting that the reality we usually take to be real is a projection. Scientists and philosophers such as Ernst Mach (who did not accept atoms as real but thought of them as mental constructs) and Hans Vaihinger (who regarded all ideas to be ‘as ifs,’ just practical fictions) belong to this tradition. Furthermore, Einstein’s idea about the relativity of time and quantum physics’ notion about time symmetry (claiming that quantum processes are indifferent to time) can clearly be seen as part of the Kantian cargo.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h174"/>Eternalism—All Things Always Already There</p>
<p class="noindent">I must confess that I am even a little worse off than Saint Augustine as quoted above, as I don’t dare say that I know what time is even when no one asks me. But I have, in fact, had experiences that with some credibility could be interpreted as seeing the future while awake and—mostly—while asleep. I am by no means special in this respect; Louisa Rhine, the colleague and spouse of J.B. Rhine, who for many years systematically collected and collated stories about anomalous experience, has stated that seeing the future in dreams is one of the paranormal phenomena most frequently reported. I could of course be fooling myself by taking my experiences to be instances of true precognition; but on the other hand I could probably also be fooling myself by denying that possibility. But, if seeing the future at all should be possible then the future must in some sense—at one level, on some plane, in some dimension—already be present.</p>
<p class="indent">Let me again quote Oliver Lodge: ‘The events may be in some sense in existence always, both past and future, and it may be we who are arriving at them, not they which are happening.’ Time, then, would not be a process of <i>becoming</i> but a process of <i>revealing</i>. In <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a> we mentioned that such a view is sometimes called ‘block time’ or ‘the B-theory of time’ with reference to John McTaggart’s 1908 book <i>The Unreality of Time</i>. And, as said, also used is ‘eternalism.’ A modern proponent of a variant of eternalism is the English physicist Julian Barbour; in his book <i>The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Our Understanding of the Universe</i> (1999) he strongly defends the position that time is non-existent. Time is a measure of movement: the Earth rotates around the Sun in 365 days; Usain Bolt has run the 100m in 9.58 seconds, etc. But time isn’t ‘out there’—its apparent reality is merely a habit of the mind. Such a position is, I would think, primarily theoretical, presumably having little practical bearing. One might wonder what would happen if Barbour visited a friend, even a most philosophical one, at 4 o’clock in the morning, trying to convince him that—since time is non-existent—it is not late at all …</p>
<p class="indent">Barbour’s position has of course been contested, perhaps most vocally by Lee Smolin, a theoretical physicist who in his book <i>Time Reborn</i> (2013) argues that physicists who, to a greater or lesser degree, deny the reality of time mix up their mathematical models with reality (precisely what Alan Watts warned about, confusing the menu with the dinner, taking the map to be the territory). Smolin, on the contrary, regards time as absolutely fundamental in the sense that even the eternal laws of nature may not be eternal after all, but may have developed—and may still be developing—over time.</p>
<p class="indent">If the eternalist perspective is valid—in one or other of its variants—perhaps we could be likened to train passengers traveling through ever-changing landscapes and passing the many stations. Looking out the window, we only see what presents itself before our eyes. But this does not mean that the landscapes and stations we will pass a little later do not yet exist!—they are already there but it will take <i>time</i> for them to be revealed to us as we are not able to process the totality of being all at once. In the interwar period Albert Einstein wrote to a friend: ‘People like us, who believe in physics, know that the distinction between past, present, and future is only a stubbornly persistent illusion,’ and on another occasion Uncle Albert stated with the usual twinkle in his eye: ‘The only reason for time is so that everything doesn’t happen at once.’</p>
<p class="indent">The considerations we are making here with regard to time are to some degree parallel to those made regarding space in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>. There we suggested that non-locality might be a property integral to consciousness and could be compared with the internet. If you are logged into say, Facebook, a friend in York will be no further away or closer than a friend in New York—if you’re online, you’re online! We also suggested a few possible explanatory models (there are definitely many more) with perspectives from quantum physics and from Immanuel Kant (‘Kantum physics’). And further we supported the idea of non-locality in a concrete way by presenting Adrian Parker’s exciting telepathy experiment with Vicky and Sara.</p>
<p class="indent">In the present chapter we have seen that there are also experiments that can be interpreted as consciousness having a non-temporal, a timeless property. And if this should be the case, maybe there is nothing strange at all about precognition—perhaps it is precisely what we should expect! But—if it really is possible to ‘see’ the future, how does this go together with the notion of free will, which most of us probably are not ready to dispense with? Are precognition and free will mutually exclusive? Or could it perhaps be rather the opposite: that getting to know the future will give us a unique opportunity to change it? If you get to know that your train is heading for Siberia, perhaps this knowledge will provide you with opportunities that you hadn’t been aware of until then? For it is only after getting to know this that you will be able to make an informed decision about whether you should change trains or not. Dick Bierman, who is both a physicist and a psychologist, is definitely no stranger to these complex themes, but his take on them is quite simple:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>This phenomena [precognition] allows you to make a decision on the basis of what will happen in the future. Does that restrain our free will? That’s up to the philosophers. I’m far too shallow a person to worry about that</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="h4"><a id="h175"/>The Solution of No Solution</p>
<p class="noindent">The solution to the problem of freedom vs. destiny—which of course is no solution in the normal sense, but merely a recognition of the problem and its likely insolubility—is probably to acknowledge, as highlighted earlier, that our words and concepts—time, freedom, choice, causality, etc.—do not truly represent the reality they purport to describe. So when we try to use them to solve our problems we are bound to roam around in labyrinths of paradoxes and contradictions, perhaps even being devoured by the Minotaur of despair! The word is not the thing, the menu is not the dinner, the map is not the territory—the words of adventure novelist (<i>King Solomon’s Mines</i>) and spiritualist H. Rider Haggard could perhaps be apposite: ‘Thinking can only serve to measure out the helplessness of thought.’</p>
<p class="indent">This, then, could be seen as a quite depressing state of affairs. But it could also be seen as an important first step in attaining freedom from our limiting interpretations of the world. Such an attitude of conscious non-knowing or un-knowing is considered wisdom e.g. by Socrates, and in traditions like Zen, Sufism and Christian mysticism. And in the first of his <i>Elegies of Duna</i>, the often extraordinarily profound poet Rainer Maria Rilke says: ‘And the diligent animals know it already: we are not truly at home in the deciphered world.’</p>
<p class="indent">Let us now run the train metaphor to its terminus: Our consciousness might possibly be pictured as sitting inside a small mental compartment, enjoying the cozy comfort but also suffering the limitations that go with it—a perception limited to seeing things as they roll up along the railway line, bound to linear time. But maybe we are able to step out of the compartment, climb up on the roof of the train compartment, and—in classical action style—be lifted up into the sky by a helicopter? Our vision would then expand tremendously! All the great religious traditions—Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Islam, Christianity, Judaism—are replete with accounts of people getting such bird’s-eye views, being lifted out of time. Are such reports just nonsense and superstition? Or could they be referring to experiences of real precognition? Or perhaps a mixture of both?</p>
<p class="indent">Well, whatever religious beliefs the reader might or might not have, maybe he/she would be willing, for a moment, to imagine being (as great as) God? Imagine that you are throwing Kant’s glasses to the floor, crushing them under your heel. Then imagine that you are climbing out of the compartment, flying up in the air, expanding infinitely. Let your Being spread out in the Universe, filling the entire space-time with all its events both Past and Future. From this supreme position Space and Time don’t exist anymore; rather, the world appears as an eternal Here and Now. At this moment you are non-local and non-temporal, ubiquitous and ever-present; you see everything and know everything. And now I ask you to consider for a moment: What if this should be more than a mere thought experiment? What if the consciousness that you—perhaps a little too much as a matter of course—refer to as your own is, on one level, <i>already</i> outside the compartment and is participating and present throughout the totality of space-time?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h176"/>Mind Over Matter—Some Experiments With Psychokinesis</p>
<p class="noindent">If we are to believe the statistics, many readers will have had experiences that can (but don’t have to) be seen as ESP—telepathy, clairvoyance or precognition. Whereas PK, psychokinesis, ‘mind over matter’—moving/influencing the physical world directly with the power of thought—is reported far less often. This phenomenon is also referred to as telekinesis (Greek: <i>tele</i> = remote, <i>kinesis</i> = movement). The terms overlap, and are often used interchangeably but it is not uncommon to use psychokinesis as an umbrella term covering absolutely all instances of this kind: the ability to influence objects, electricity, computers, the weather, living beings, etc. Whereas telekinesis has a more limited use, referring mostly to the moving and influencing of physical objects: tables, keys, spoons, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">Few claim to have experienced this phenomenon—apart from being able to move their body by acts of will, which, when thinking about it, actually is a form of psychokinesis. And even fewer claim to be able to control it. The real-life stories largely disclose uncontrolled and even chaotic events, often connected to poltergeists (‘noisy ghosts’). Still, some researchers claim to have documented various forms of psychokinesis in the laboratory. Their experiments have involved a variety of things: bending of metal, influencing bingo and Lottery balls (a most useful feat, indeed…), influencing the growth of plants and bacteria, controlling the behavior of insects, evaporating clouds, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">A distinction is often made between macro PK and micro PK, the line being drawn some place between those effects that can be seen with the naked eye and those that will need to be measured by instruments. Media reports have often revolved around macro PK and in particular showpieces such as metal bending. Scientists, however, are usually more interested in micro PK, which they consider more fit for research—easier to succeed with and easier to control. In practice this will often mean experiments in influencing electronics, as, for example, in so-called random event generators (see below) and computer programs.</p>
<p class="indent">Many suggestions have been made to provide an explanation as to how PK may be possible. As we’ve heard earlier, both C.G. Jung and Wolfgang Pauli claimed to have experienced diverse incidents involving psychokinesis. One of their suggested explanations for the phenomena was that the archetypes (the collective fields of ‘psychic energy,’ as we discussed in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a>) would facilitate exchanges between our consciousness and the outside world—which deep down are not separate entities at all but different manifestations of the underlying oneness. Such ideas may perhaps sound a little ‘airy-fairy,’ but Pauli was, as we know, awarded the Nobel Prize in physics, so it is probably worthwhile to pay attention to his speculations.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h177"/>Matter and Mind—Different Sides of the Same Reality</p>
<p class="noindent">The basic thought in a number of the suggested explanations is that behind the various objects and entities in the world—behind galaxies and quarks, behind consciousness and matter—there is a basic unity, an <i>arché</i>, a <i>unus mundus</i>, an all-unifying principle that is seen as the source of everything. Some will name this principle ‘energy,’ others ‘information,’ yet others again ‘akasha,’ etc. But anyway, the idea related to psychokinesis is that any event happening within our consciousness is simultaneously also an event happening within this underlying reality; a movement within a drop is simultaneously a movement within the ocean. Given this entangled state of affairs it doesn’t seem a far stretch to imagine that if certain activities take place within our consciousness, corresponding activities might take place in the surrounding world. For more specific ideas one might perhaps want to check out the brilliant collection of essays I recommended at the beginning of this chapter, namely <i>Parapsychology in the Twenty-First Century: Essays on the Future of Psychical Research</i> by Michael A. Thalbourne and Lance Storm (eds.). Also the various books of the Bohmian quantum physicist F. David Peat may prove helpful.</p>
<p class="indent">However, several parapsychologists will confess that they don’t have a satisfactory theory of how PK may eventually work. An interesting discussion of important problems arising out of psychology, biology and physics when trying to explain PK is provided by Adrian Parker in the chapter ‘The Mind-Body Problem and the Issue of Psychokinesis’ in <i>Mysterious Minds: The Neurobiology of Psychics, Mediums, and Other Extraordinary People</i> (Krippner and Friedman, eds.). It includes a useful bibliography for those who wish to delve deeper into the matter—or maybe even better, into the mind’s potential power over physical matter.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h178"/>Macro PK</p>
<p class="noindent">In addition to his celebrated ESP studies J.B. Rhine also conducted some lesser-known research on PK. For quite some time he hesitated to publish the results in this field, apparently because he felt he was controversial enough as it was. In his PK trials Rhine would often use dice throwing. The subjects were given the task to ‘will’ the dice to land showing a specific face—say, the one with six spots. At first the subjects themselves threw the dice. Obviously, this was highly unfortunate as it provided opportunities for cheating by sleight of hand. Hence Rhine changed the routines and employed a machine to throw the dice to ensure proper randomization. In 1941 Rhine evaluated the results from 651,216 trials, and the statistics showed a high degree of success. According to Rhine, the chance for the hit rate to be coincidental was 1 to 10,115, meaning the odds were less than 1 in 10,000!</p>
<p class="indent">Some critics will argue that if your method is skewed, the results may become more and more swayed the more trials you run, and that Rhine’s results therefore need not be utterly impressive but could instead be utterly misleading. However, Rhine’s statistics had, as we heard, been evaluated by none less than ‘<i>The</i> Fisher’ himself (Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher) and the dice throwing was eventually completely automated. So, where a fault with such far-reaching consequences could be hidden is not easily explained. And there are few, even among the hardline skeptics, who suspect Rhine as having engaged in deceit.</p>
<p class="indent">In general, PK trials have been fraught with obstacles, not least of which has been rampant fraud; this has proved surprisingly difficult to avoid even in cases that have been witnessed by both magicians and scientists (who may be professionals in lab work but amateurs in conjuring). For example, the Austrian medium Rudi Schneider (1908–1957), who managed to manifest ‘spirit hands’ in the air, move objects and affect electrical apparatus while sitting almost motionless in a chair under meticulous surveillance, including cameras shooting from three different angles. Several scientists declared him to be a real paragnost. Schneider even managed to baffle the eminent illusionist Will Goldston, who had authored books on magic (and who also was a life-long friend of Houdini). Goldston stated that he didn’t see how Schneider’s effects could be brought about by mere tricks. Whereas other magicians were convinced that Schneider was no more than a clever fraud. Without drawing any clear-cut conclusions from this, let me just mention that Schneider eventually gave up acting as a medium and went back to his original trade as a car mechanic.</p>
<p class="indent">Nina Kulagina, the Russian alleged paragnost who was introduced at the beginning of <a href="07_chapter02.xhtml">chapter 2</a>, underwent thorough testing, and at least some of the results seemed very convincing. Many skeptics will argue that Kulagina and her act may have been no more than a carefully orchestrated Soviet propaganda piece—rigged instruments, actors playing their paid-for parts, etc.—and perhaps they might be right; the Soviet state was notorious for producing ‘alternative facts’ supporting their claim to superiority. But still, let me mention that Montague Ullman, Stanley Krippner’s colleague during the dream telepathy experiments, once met Kulagina in a private setting and was impressed by the demonstration she gave him. And, what about the significant experiences reported by Benson Herbert (<a href="07_chapter02.xhtml">chapter 2</a>)? He claims he nearly collapsed from a strange kind of heat/electricity coming from her hand. Could such an effect have been caused by an unknown concealed technical device? Or was it an extreme and unpleasant demonstration of the ‘warm hands’ that healers are so often reported to possess?</p>
<p class="indent">Another exciting (alleged) telekinetic is the Frenchman Jean-Pierre Girard. He claims his special abilities were activated after he was struck by lightning as a child. Girard excels in mental metal bending, and has also bent objects placed inside sealed glass bottles. In some cases the metal was placed in the bottle while it was being cast. Girard’s demonstrations have impressed many <i>professeurs</i>, including the Nobel laureate in physics, Alfred Kastler, and the esteemed metallurgist Charles Crussard. What impressed the metallurgist most was not the bending itself, but the alterations in the metal’s molecular structure that had taken place. Crussard has also stated that some of Girard’s demonstrations ‘were even followed by no less than seven reputed illusionists who saw the deformations of the metal but were unable to find any sign of faking […].’</p>
<p class="indent">On May 27, 1994 Géraldy, Stavisky and Ranky, three members of Comité Illusionniste d’Expertise des Phénomènes Paranormaux (CIEPP), an organization of French magicians specializing in paranormal phenomena, conducted a trial with Girard; this also included a subsequent laboratory test on the structure of the metal he had bent. After the trial, Ranky, who was the president of CIEPP, signed a declaration supporting Girard’s claim to be the real deal (though I would guess a number of his colleagues would still look for other explanations…). Girard can be seen doing his thing in videos available on YouTube.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h179"/>Uri Geller and the Spoonbenders</p>
<p class="noindent">Suspicions of fraud have always loomed big time over Israeli TV star and paragnost (or ‘paragnost’) Uri Geller. Cheating has even been caught on film (Geller is once clearly seen bending a spoon with his hands and not with his mind). And Geller has actually admitted to using tricks early in his career when he worked as an entertainer for military personnel in Israel. And from time to time he has, as it seems, hinted about also doing so afterwards. So perhaps it is all fake? Anyway, Geller’s position as a completely unique paranormal pop-cultural icon justifies a mention, and perhaps—as we’ll see—it cannot be entirely ruled out that he could have a little more than just tricks up his sleeve (perhaps…).</p>
<p class="indent">As many are probably aware Geller became known through his television appearances in the 1970s, where he dazzled by bending spoons, keys and other metal objects, apparently by using solely the powers of his mind. Uri became a celebrity, and hung out with VIPs of all kinds. Wernher von Braun, the rocket scientist who first worked for the Third Reich and later headed NASA (from Nazi to NASA), claimed that Geller made his wedding ring change shape—without even touching it! And in an interview the one and only Clint Eastwood told Reuters:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>The only thing I have ever had that is sort of offbeat, that is I have watched Uri Geller spin the keys and things like that… I have seen that so I am a believer. It was my house key and the only way I would be able to use it is get a hammer and beat it out back flat again. So there are certain energy things that are outside of the norm…</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Whereas the physics genius and Nobel laureate Richard Feynman, who was an amateur magician, has said that Geller did <i>not</i> manage to bend a key while he was watching.</p>
<p class="indent">The common perception among magicians is that Geller belongs to their own flock. But some of the pros, like David Ben and David Blaine—known among other things for having been frozen in a block of ice!—think that Geller perhaps could have ‘something more.’ (If we can take Ben’s and Blaine’s word for it—magicians will often have an agenda or two more than the rest of us.) Blaine has stated:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Uri bent a spoon for me, the first time he did it, I thought there must be a trick. The second time I was stunned, completely, completely stunned and amazed. It just bent in my hand. I’ve never seen anything like it. It takes a lot to impress me. Uri Geller is for real and anyone who doesn’t recognise that is either deluding himself, or is a very sad person</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">And Blaine is not alone: the Danish magician Leo Leslie, who once tested Geller, became completely perplexed. As co-founder of a magician’s guild and editor of a Danish journal for magicians, Leslie apparently was a respected craftsman—which was probably the reason Danmarks Radio, the national broadcaster in Denmark, chose Leslie to conduct the test. In his 1974 book <i>Uri Geller: FUP eller Fakta</i> (<i>Uri Geller: Fraud or Facts</i>) Leslie relates that he had wondered if Geller made use of chemicals on his fingers. He therefore had keys prepared that were plated and lacquered. One of these keys was held in front of Geller by a journalist. Leslie tells what happened next.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Uri stroked the key a few times with his index finger. ‘No, I can’t’ he said. ‘You have done something to it. I cannot get in contact with the metal!’ I licked my lips. Now he was trapped. Then it was chemicals after all, I thought. I took the key from the journalist and studied it closer. While I sat looking at the key, the varnish began to crackle and the next moment flakes of the plating curled up like tiny banana peels while the key started to bend between my fingers!</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Also various eminent physicists were fascinated by Geller and some of them also ran experiments with him. (Might there here be new natural laws to discover? And perhaps some Nobel Prizes to win?) One of those was John Hasted, head of experimental physics at Birkbeck College, University of London, who we briefly encountered in the middle of <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>. After some experiments during the summer of 1974 Hasted wrote the following in a report:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>We possess four numbered and weighed brass Yale keys which were bent through angles of between 10 and 40 degrees under light stroking action by Mr Geller. If, under symmetrical four-point loading, force pulses of the order of 500N (say 50kg of weight) had been applied to the keys, similar bends would have been produced. […] Geller applied a light, stroking action between forefinger and thumb, or by forefinger, with key placed on the table. In all cases, several witnesses watched the entire operation intently from within 1 meter. In one case, the key was not stroked but was simply, held under a cold-water tap. In all cases the bending took a time of the order of minutes to complete, and it usually appeared to continue for a short while after the stroking had been terminated. No physical or chemical explanation of these phenomena is readily apparent. The mean grain size at the bent surface has been compared with that in unbent and mechanically bent specimens by x-ray reflection and electron micrograph. No significant change in grain orientation or size was noted</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Hasted clearly sounds intrigued, but he still does not conclude that telekinesis has taken place. The report ends as follows: ‘Continued experiments are planned.’ But, as far as I know, such follow-up sessions never happened. However, what—according to Professor Hasted—<i>did</i> happen was a series of mysterious episodes in his own home. It supposedly started one beautiful day in the kitchen when a small ivory figurine descended from the ceiling, followed by an old clock key suddenly appearing seemingly right out of thin air (these items were usually kept in the living room). Over the next weeks such spontaneous movements— ‘apportations’—happened to many other items as well, while the ivory statuette and the clock key continued to regularly take a trip from the living room to the kitchen! The key belonged to an antique clock that had not been functioning for 30 years. But one evening this clock allegedly started to chime, something that made Hasted’s wife greatly perturbed. Things hardly improved when the clock gave no sign of wanting to stop its rampant behavior that night…</p>
<p class="indent">Others have also reported strange events happening in connection with Geller. Several articles in Norwegian newspapers from the 1970s report that ordinary people tell of suddenly having bent metal objects (apparently) with the power of thought after having seen Geller exercise his crafts on television. Mere delusions? Eager imagination in overwrought people who want to believe in such things and/or want to have their 15 minutes in the limelight? Probably in most cases, but who knows? Geller has explained that he thinks such episodes may occur because there are many people with latent PK capabilities, and when they see his demonstrations their own dormant skills are triggered and come alive.</p>
<p class="indent">Okay, this sounds kind of plausible, but skeptics of course regard it as just part of the typical Gellerish hogwash concerning non-existent powers. And sometimes, even Geller himself cast doubts on his abilities. In 2008 he received the prestigious David Berglas International Magic Award. When the question ‘Are you a magician [i.e. and not a psychic]?’ was raised from the audience, Geller—who nowadays calls himself a ‘mystifier’—then really mystified. If he was not a real paragnost, he said, he would perhaps be the greatest of all illusionists:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I thrive on controversy, looking back on my career, I called myself a psychic, I constantly need to re-invent myself, you will not get a straight answer. I have to protect the performers in my show, I owe it to them, I don’t want to know how they do it, I just want to see the most mind blowing show there is. Let’s say I wasn’t real, let’s say for the last years I’ve fooled the journalists, the scientists, my family, my friends. You. If I managed to fool them, I must be the greatest?</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Well, should we then once and for all conclude that Geller is nothing more than a trickster? Most of us would probably be inclined to draw this conclusion. But, interestingly enough, David Copperfield—the mega-magician who once ‘conjured away’ the Statue of Liberty and who readers will be familiar with from the TV screen—surprisingly said this about Geller on German television in 2009 (the program is easily found on YouTube): ‘I think some of the things he shows are illusion. But I cannot claim for sure, that this applies to everything.’ Copperfield says that he has not experienced telekinesis himself, but that he—who I would think knows all the tricks in the book, and who also has added diverse new ones—would not rule out that this phenomenon may be real. However, he believes that it would be very difficult to demonstrate this on a stage.</p>
<p class="indent">Let me <i>en passant</i> mention that in general magicians are much more open to psi than perhaps could be expected. Several surveys have been conducted with very different methodologies and very different results, but just to present a few ‘fun facts.’ In 1980, a German survey found that 72 percent of magicians in the German Magic Circle thought ESP probably was real. In 1993, Marcello Truzzi, the American skeptic and sociologist we mentioned in <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>, polled the Psychic Entertainers Association and found that 47 percent believed that ESP ‘truly exists.’ And in 2008 the skeptic Richard Wiseman, also mentioned earlier, made a Web Survey among magicians, one of his questions being: ‘Do you believe that you have had a paranormal experience?’ to which a surprising 26.25 percent answered, ‘Yes.’ So, as opposed to what many think, it’s not at all like ‘we magicians know all the tricks so we don’t believe in this stuff!’</p>
<p class="indent">In the wake of Geller’s performances ‘PK parties’ were organized around the world. This trend was initiated in 1981 by the late Jack Houck, an engineer at Boeing aircraft factory. Houck has theorized quite a bit about PK and he has also created an informative website: <a href="http://www.jackhouck.com">http://www.jackhouck.com</a>. At PK parties people get together attempting to use mental power to bend cutlery and other metal objects. The late American author and scriptwriter Michael Crichton (who graduated as a medical doctor from Harvard and as a visiting lecturer taught anthropology at Cambridge) is perhaps best known for having written the book behind Spielberg’s blockbuster <i>Jurassic Park</i>. In his book <i>Travels</i> Crichton tells of his experiences at a PK party:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I looked down. My spoon had begun to bend. I hadn’t even realized. The metal was completely pliable, like soft plastic. It wasn’t particularly hot, either, just slightly warm. I easily bend the bowl of the spoon in half, using only my fingertips. This didn’t require any pressure at all, just guiding with my fingertips.—I put the bent spoon aside and tried a fork. After a few moments of rubbing, the fork twisted like a pretzel. It was easy. I bent several more spoons and forks. […]</i></p>
<p class="indent"><i>Uri Geller, an Israeli magician, who claims psychic powers, often bends spoons, but other magicians, such as James Randi, claim that spoon bending isn’t a psychic phenomenon at all, just a trick.—But I had bent a spoon, and I knew it wasn’t a trick. I looked around the room and saw little children, eight or nine years old, bending large metal bars. They weren’t trying to trick anybody. They were just little kids having a good time. […]</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Astonishing, indeed! But still, the cutlery <i>might</i> conceivably have been fatigued (e.g. by repeated bending) in advance. Or it <i>might</i> have been made of <i>nitinol</i> (nickel titanium) or some other shape-memory alloy. These are alloys with a particular molecular structure that are able to ‘remember’ their original mold. Say you cast a fork, giving it a sharp bend in the middle. When it has cooled down you straighten it out and it then both looks and feels like any other fork. But, inside the molecular structure the fork’s original shape is ‘remembered,’ and if heated slightly (which may happen when being stroked repeatedly) it will gradually regain its original shape (the bend starts to return). So, if you want to appear as paranormally gifted to your circle of friends I recommend that you buy a set of nitinol cutlery!</p>
<p class="indent">Dean Radin relates a funny episode in <i>Entangled Minds</i>. He had long been highly skeptical of stories about the mental bending of metal. But once at a PK party he suddenly managed to do it himself! He had beforehand decided he would only be persuaded if <i>the bowl</i> of the spoon bent (as the shaft is more easily bent one may—at least in theory—bend it by unconscious muscle use). After having held a spoon in his hand for a while without anything special happening his attention had settled on the activities of a neighboring lady. Then, suddenly, he experienced the bowl of his spoon becoming like putty between his fingers and folding without the use of any force. In his blog Radin has written that he later dipped the spoon into boiling water but nothing happened. This indicates that it probably <i>was</i> an ordinary spoon and not just some heat-sensitive magic device. (When he tried to bend a similar spoon in the normal way he had to use a couple of pinchers.) However, I still wish Radin had taken his PK bent spoon to a metallurgical laboratory!</p>
<p class="indent">Well, anyway, <i>if</i> Radin’s spoon should have been no more than an elite specimen of trick equipment, this could hardly have been the case with Clint Eastwood’s key that Geller bent. Eastwood said it was his own house key, thus it seems fair to assume that Geller couldn’t just have replaced it with some copy. And moreover, the anti-chemical keys that the Danish magician Leo Leslie had prepared specially for testing Geller were clearly not trick keys. (<i>Unless</i>, of course, Geller, before arriving in Denmark, had made an unholy arrangement with Leslie: ‘Hello Leo—it’s Uri here; listen, I have a really interesting suggestion for you!’ etc.)</p>
<p class="indent">So, could Geller perhaps be a true paragnost after all? Or maybe he is simply the best in the world at creating the illusion of spoon bending? Many magicians say Geller isn’t <i>that</i> good, really. But as the great David Berglas thought him worthy of his prestigious award maybe the naysayers are just envious of Geller’s almost magical/paranormal success? Regardless, what we can agree on is that the most famous among the world’s spoon benders is—without comparison—Uri Geller!</p>
<p class="indent">Let’s now briefly return to the lab: In his 1985 book <i>Bak Tid og Rom</i> (<i>Behind Time and Space</i>) the Norwegian philosopher and environmentalist Erik Dammann has, among other researchers open to unusual perspectives, interviewed the abovementioned Professor John Hasted and had him describe the control procedures used when conducting research on metal bending. Crucial for Hasted was that the subjects—the would-be metal benders—never got to touch the objects. (As we read in Hasted’s report, Geller had, in fact, been allowed to touch the keys, but that was many years earlier). And still, Hasted claimed that many of his subjects, including children, managed to perform metal bending using only the power of thought. In retrospect Dammann felt the need to pose a direct question to Hasted, and wrote him a letter: ‘Do you—after about ten years of serious research in this area—consider some people’s ability to bend metal by mental influence to be proved beyond all reasonable doubt?’ The answer he got was: ‘Yes. Sincerely J.B. Hasted.’</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h180"/>Micro PK—the Devil is in the Details</p>
<p class="noindent">Serious study of micro PK is often regarded as having begun in the 1960s and early trials were conducted by the renowned French biologist Remy Chauvin (1913–2009). Chauvin has written close to 40 books and was eventually created honorary professor at the Sorbonne, the most prestigious university in France. Chauvin happened to be the mentor of my father, the biologist Tore Albert Simonsen, and I met him when I was a boy and we were living in France, but I was too young to ask him about his science. When testing for psychokinesis Chauvin had his subjects attempt to increase and decrease the frequency of ‘clicks’ in a Geiger counter—which, as most readers probably will know, is an apparatus used for measuring radioactivity. The results were reportedly astounding but were lacking in consistency. Chauvin conducted, however, other experiments, and in combination with the research of others this eventually convinced him of the reality of psychokinesis. Moreover, Chauvin studied psi in animals, so-called AnPsi, and his writings cover diverse aspects of the paranormal, including UFO and ET-ish stuff. One of Chauvin’s books, which for fear of the ‘emperor’s wrath’ (see <a href="08_chapter03.xhtml">chapter 3</a>) was published pseudonymously, is called <i>Nos pouvoirs inconnus</i>. This literally translates as <i>Our Unknown Powers</i>! I swear that I was not aware of the title of Chauvin’s book when I subtitled mine. But of course, it is a somewhat obvious title for a book on the paranormal.</p>
<p class="indent">A few years later the German-American physicist Helmut Schmidt (1928–2011) entered the paranormal scene. Schmidt had originally worked as a senior researcher at Boeing’s aircraft factory, but from the early 1970s on he devoted himself to other—in a certain sense—even loftier matters as he became head of the laboratory at Duke University that had previously been led by Rhine. One of Schmidt’s projects was to find out whether psychokinesis could influence Random Event Generators (REG). These machines generate series of random events (I guess that’s why they are called random event generators…) e.g. colored flashes or numbers appearing on a screen. The original REGs utilized the activities of unstable atomic nuclei, radioactivity that is, or so-called electrical noise; the order of the flashes or numbers they produced thus became completely unpredictable. (These REGs have been largely superseded by computer programs that are much cheaper but not necessarily as reliable.) Schmidt’s subjects would attempt to exert micro PK by influencing the distribution of flashes and numbers, typically by steering the generator to come up with specific colors or numbers more often than others.</p>
<p class="indent">Schmidt claimed to have demonstrated that when using a generator with one green and one red light—where an equal blink distribution between the two colors was expected—the subjects got their chosen lamp to blink approximately 1–2 percent more often than the other. When running a series with a great amount of blinks the distribution should eventually become almost equal; there should <i>not</i> be a consistent deviation of 1–2 percent in the ‘forced’ direction. And if this happens it has to do with an effect that requires an explanation. Schmidt believed that the explanation was psychokinesis—that the subjects’ intentions, to a small but very real degree, intervened directly in the nuclear processes and electrical circuits of the REGs. Needless to say, skeptics do not agree. They prefer to attribute Schmidt’s results to possible errors—either in the apparatus, or in the statistics, or eventually in the reporting procedures. For, what if Schmidt consciously/unconsciously was eager to report successes but a little more sloppy with reporting the experiments that yielded either zero or negative results? Then, over time, we could get a very wrong impression of what had happened in his laboratory…</p>
<p class="indent">The well-known skeptic James Alcock has often highlighted this problem, which is typically referred to as ‘publication bias’ or the ‘file drawer effect’ (results not to one’s liking are left unpublished in the drawer). Without commenting on Schmidt’s case specifically, let me mention that in one of his meta-analyses Dean Radin went through older trials with random generators (more than 800 studies as of 1987!). And the meta-analysis seemed to confirm that psychokinetic effects really were taking place. Because, for the positive results to be explained by publication bias/the file-drawer effect—as Alcock et al. tend to do—then, according to Radin, there had to be more than 50,000 ‘unwanted’ studies concealed in the file drawers of the parapsychologists—a completely unrealistic number.</p>
<p class="indent">Also in recent times many REG experiments have been conducted and Radin believes that taken together the newer trials confirm that our intentions can have a small but measurable effect on micro-processes. The French physicist Costa de Beauregard (1911–2007) thought that such effects did not pose any problem with respect to either the laws of physics or to rationality. His interpretation of quantum physics—in which consciousness is seen to have an important role—implies rather the opposite: ‘phenomena such as psychokinesis or telepathy, far from being irrational, should, on the contrary, be expected as very rational.’ And the physicist and Nobel laureate Eugene Wigner has stated that since matter has an impact on consciousness we should expect consciousness to have an impact on matter. If not, it would be the only known relationship in the universe where influence goes only one way.</p>
<p class="indent">For those readers who don’t feel convinced by the research of others, I have good news to herald: Computer programs for testing micro PK are publicly available. Diverse websites will also offer such tests for free, but buyer beware: my humble opinion is that there is quite a lot of unreliable stuff out there. The Institute of Noetic Sciences (IONS) had a free testing platform running for some time, but as of writing it seems to have been dismantled. But I would guess they could still help you to buy the right program.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h181"/>The Global Consciousness Project</p>
<p class="noindent">‘A micro PK experiment in macro format’ seems to be the <i>mot juste</i> for describing the Global Consciousness Project, which was started in 1998 at Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory at Princeton University. The lab closed in 2007 but the project is still running, led by psychologist Dr Roger Nelson and supported by the Institute of Noetic Sciences. About 70 random event generators, generating 0s and 1s, are deployed in different parts of the world and the data are sent back to computers in Princeton for analysis. The Global Consciousness Project seeks to detect if movements in our hypothesized collective Consciousness are reflected in the output of the generators. For example, if events affecting many people emotionally—natural disasters, war, terrorist attacks, strikes, etc.—make the generators depart from their usual distribution pattern of 0s and 1s. And many of the physicists and engineers engaged in the project really think this is the case! On the project’s website it is stated that ‘when a great event synchronizes the feelings of millions of people, our network of RNGs becomes subtly structured.’ Hence, in the locution of <i>Star Wars</i> they claim to be able to detect ‘a great disturbance in the Force.’</p>
<p class="indent">The Global Consciousness Project has a great amount of different events on file, including the September 11 terror attack, where ‘a great disturbance in Force’ was allegedly measured. Critics claim, however, that the project’s methodology is dubious, e.g. that the results could be due to an arbitrary choice of ‘time window.’ Meaning that if the collection of data had started/ended a little earlier/later—for when, exactly, does an earthquake or a battle begin/end?—the results may not have been significant.</p>
<p class="indent">The project has, in fact, been criticized on many grounds; I shall not enter the debate but just mention that I find the project to be quite interesting. Let me also mention that one can find the degree of ‘force disturbance’ pertaining to recent events measured on their website. Some of the latest measurements give you the numbers for Obama’s farewell address, Trump’s inauguration, the Women’s March on Washington, and the Muslim ban protests.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h182"/>Thoughts on Healing</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h183"/>Healing at a Distance—Remotely Plausible or Plain Placebo?</p>
<p class="noindent">Obviously it is a daunting task to correctly identify how healing works—or if and when it works—if the eventual effects are due to chance, conveyance of energy, transference of information, intervention of spirits, or you name it. Among skeptics the trend is to attribute all possible effects to the so-called placebo effect (<i>placebo</i> = I please), meaning that an expectation of recovery will help to mobilize the organism’s inherent resources and may bring about healing. Imagination is clearly a powerful force; in some surveys, placebo medicines (‘sugar pills’) have actually worked better than real medicine! But could this effect, powerful as it is, explain everything there is to healing? The well-known British healer Matthew Manning is a great fan of activating the placebo effect by the means of ‘creative visualization’—i.e. creating mental images that vividly symbolize that healing takes place—but he also believes there’s much more to healing. Based in part on laboratory experiments, he argues that healing can have a distinct impact on living systems even where placebo effects are highly unlikely, for instance when it comes to the growth of plants, which seemingly can be accelerated by healing. Manning gives interesting examples of this in a small book with the charming title <i>No Faith Required</i> (1995).</p>
<p class="indent">Another star on the healing firmament is Eric Pearl, who was originally a chiropractor. In his book <i>The Reconnection</i> (1998) he claims to have discovered his healing abilities when patients he treated for spinal and muscular problems surprisingly and spontaneously—without the use of suggestion, hypnosis, etc.—recovered from other and often more serious diseases. If his descriptions are correct it seems unlikely that a placebo could account for such healings. Pearl explains that other strange psi phenomena of diverse kinds began to occur in this period of his life. This resembles a pattern reported by various other outstanding healers, e.g. the Snåsa Man, Matthew Manning and Harry Edwards. Of course, all such stories could be merely lies or delusions, but they could also be an indication of what we hinted at earlier: that the different psi phenomena may be expressions of one phenomenon, which in turn—as shamanic drumming and meditative practices seem to suggest—may be connected to the presence of certain brainwave patterns.</p>
<p class="indent">The well-known TV hypnotist Paul McKenna, who some years back moved on from being a mere entertainer to using his hypnotic skills to help people stop smoking, control their weight and eradicate phobias, has said that his father, a skeptic, was cured of severe arthritis by the healer Seka Nikolic (the father more or less had to be tricked into the hands of the healer). This experience made McKenna—who being a hypnotist has an unusually profound understanding of the placebo effect—think that healing might be something more than this. McKenna and Nikolic have subsequently worked together with clients, based on the idea that a combination of placebo (induced through hypnosis) and healing may give the best possible result. For a discussion of studies on healing, there is a most helpful article by L. Dossey and S.A. Schwartz, called ‘Nonlocality, Intention, and Observer Effects in Healing Studies: Laying a Foundation for the Future’ (the link can be found in the bibliography).</p>
<p class="indent">I myself have been quite intrigued by the placebo effect, and I actually registered ‘Placebo’ as a trademark in Denmark (VR 2006 01402). The idea was to use it as the name of a lozenge, with the slogan: ‘Placebo, the lozenge that will cure everything—as long as you believe it!’ There would also be a strong version with large, red tablets called ‘Placebo Forte.’</p>
<p class="indent">Some people believe that healing is a kind of psychokinesis, namely <i>direct mental interactions with living systems</i> (DMILS). If this should be correct, we may need to modify the statement made earlier in the chapter claiming that psychokinesis is rare, for healing is, in fact, a phenomenon which is reported quite often. But others believe that healing should rather be understood as a form of telepathically triggered ‘System Recovery.’ This is based on the idea that by its genetics the body is able to ‘remember’ its earlier optimal function. Thus healing tries to ‘remind’ the body to reset its system to ‘factory specifications.’ Or eventually to do just a little ‘system restore’—partially reverting the system back to a condition when it was working more properly.</p>
<p class="indent">Regardless, if one understands healing as caused by psi in one form or another one will not just, and not even primarily, emphasize psychological factors—placebo, acceptance, security, etc.—which obviously can be important in eliciting healing. Nor will one consider the therapeutic touch, such as the laying on of hands, to be crucial. If healing really is a psi phenomenon it is actually possible to imagine that it might take place without any normal contact—touch, sight, conversation, etc.—between the healer and the patient. This is what is often called ‘remote healing.’</p>
<p class="indent">Remote healing is reported from days of old and from various corners of the earth: in the New Testament, in ancient China, in shamanic traditions, etc. But we certainly don’t have to visit remote times or remote places to find remote healing! According to Norway’s most respected newspaper, <i>Aftenposten</i>, the famous cross-country skier Petter Northug (13 world champion titles, two Olympic gold medals, etc.) received remote healing from Joralf Gjerstad, the Snåsa Man, during the ‘Tour de Ski’ in 2009. The sixth leg was held in Italy on January 3. The day before, Northug was feeling terrible, ‘his sinuses were completely stuffed and he had a headache.’ Northug called the Snåsa Man—and what happened? ‘The day after he crushed Axel Teichmann in the Monster hill in Val di Fiemme, having made an almost full recovery.’ (Teichmann won this race, though, but Northug finished before him on the final list.) (<i>Aftenposten</i>, October 15, 2011. Link to the article can be found in the bibliography.)</p>
<p class="indent">In an interview 10 days later with Northug in <i>Her og Naa</i> (<i>Here and Now</i>) the Norwegian ski ace said: ‘When I got the Snåsa Man on the line my sinuses suddenly opened. It may sound unbelievable but the Snåsa Man actually helped me. We talked for a while, but what he said I vowed should be between him and me.’</p>
<p class="indent">As there was a conversation between the Snåsa Man and Northug (<i>Nor-thug</i>—Norwegian thug, what a name for an athlete!) his sudden improvement was not necessarily only (or at all) due to remote healing but perhaps also (or only?) to an efficient pep talk.</p>
<p class="indent">Let me also mention that about two years later Northug again consulted the Snåsa Man, this time with a personal visit. Severe fatigue was now completely thwarting his preparations for the upcoming world championship in Holmenkollen three months later. According to his biography, <i>Northug: A Family History</i>, he became better almost immediately after talking to the Snåsa Man, and was able to resume training later the same day. (Northug went on to win three gold and two silver medals in Holmenkollen.) Perhaps the Snåsa Man’s placebo eliciting abilities are nothing short of miraculous? Or perhaps it was all coincidental? Or perhaps the old man really has some serious psi abilities?</p>
<p class="indent">For neither placebo nor coincidences seem likely to account for the following case involving the former Norwegian Minister of Health, Bjarne Haakon Hanssen. In 2009 Hanssen told both national TV and the press that because of colic his baby boy had cried almost continuously, day and night, for two months (ugh!). At last Hanssen was so exhausted and wretched that out of sheer desperation he called the Snåsa Man. We let Hanssen tell the story himself:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I was then a basically skeptical but desperate person who called for help, says Hanssen […]—Gjerstad said just: ‘That’s okay, I’ll see what I can do.’ Then we hung up, and I thought that this is unlikely to help, says Hanssen. But just ten minutes later there started some dramatic processes in that tiny body.—Haakon [the baby boy], was reclining in a tilting chair, and then he began farting, or releasing air, as it is called here. In ten to fifteen minutes there came such amounts that both I and Rigmor [his wife] thought it totally implausible that this really was possible, says Hanssen. This was about 6 pm, and after a quarter of an hour expelling gas the baby fell asleep. He slept all evening, all night and well into the next day. This was the first good night he’d had [in two months], says Hanssen</i>.</p>
<p class="indent"><i>The next days the baby was well, but after three or four days he gradually began to deteriorate. After a week I called Gjerstad once more and explained what had happened. He said again ‘Okay, I’ll see what I can do again.’ After ten to fifteen minutes the process in the baby’s body started again: Exactly the same thing happened once more. He let out huge amounts of air, fell asleep and had thereafter no more problems with his stomach, says Hanssen. (Verdens Gang, February 26, 2009. Link to the article can be found in the bibliography.)</i></p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">The Health Minister has made a partial reassessment of his own skepticism after his experience with the Snåsa Man:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>I don’t have much faith in healing and other alternative things like fortune telling. But neither do I think it is right to deny my own experience with the Snåsa Man. I just convey what I experienced, says Hanssen</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">It seems difficult here—with an absent patient who doesn’t have the faintest idea of what healing is, and a father who was skeptical even after his first conversation with Gjerstad—to see where such a potent and acute placebo effect could come from. And, honestly, is it really likely to be coincidental that—after two months of colic around the clock—the baby is healed in an instantaneous (and humorous!) way when the Snåsa Man was contacted? And moreover: that this weird scenario not only manifested itself once but twice? Strange… strange indeed. Well, thus spoke Health Minister Hanssen!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h184"/>A Trip to Hawaii</p>
<p class="noindent">There has, in fact, been quite a lot of research conducted on healing; a comprehensive overview from 2005 suggests that even back then there were more than 2,000 studies on file. Unfortunately, many of them suffered from methodological weaknesses and limitations. Some of the best are found in the peer reviewed <i>Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine</i>. In December 2005, the magazine published one that I think deserves to be called ‘a classic’ and which is often referred to as ‘The Hawaii Study.’ This is because (you’re right!) it was conducted in Hawaii, more specifically at the Department of Radiology, North Hawaii Community Hospital at Waimea. Even if essentially healing-related, the Hawaii study did not assess the possible benefits of remote healing but rather—somewhat more modestly—if intent from a distance would have a measurable effect at all. This is a <i>sine qua non</i>, an absolutely necessary condition, if remote healing should be possible.</p>
<p class="indent">The chief scientist was Jeanne Achterberg, PhD, professor of psychology at Southwestern Medical School, and together with her colleagues she presented the study in an article named ‘Evidence for Correlations Between Distant Intentionality and Brain Function in Receivers: A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Analysis.’ It can be downloaded from the journal’s website, and a link to a partial reprint can be found in the bibliography.</p>
<p class="indent">A short description: Eleven healers of different traditions—shamanism, qi gong, kahuna, etc.—had each chosen a receiver. Based on the assumption that emotional rapport helps facilitate the process, the healers had been told to choose a receiver to whom they felt a close connection. The receivers would be placed in a magnetic brain scanner, while the healers—located in an electromagnetically shielded control room, physically and optically isolated from the receiver—would attempt to influence the receivers by ‘doing their thing.’ Such an arrangement was put in place to prevent the exchange of audio-visual clues and possible radio transmission (e.g. by concealed spy apparatus) between the healers and the receivers.</p>
<p class="indent">The different healer/receiver pairs were then tested—one pair at a time. The healer would send ‘good intentions’ to the receiver in a series of 12 turns, each turn lasting two minutes. The order was randomized so only the researchers would know when the good intentions were to be ‘switched on’ and ‘switched off’ respectively. This protocol was partly employed to avoid cheating but just as much to neutralize the placebo effect. Since the ‘sending’ schedule was unknown, the receivers could not coordinate their expectations with the healers ‘sending.’</p>
<p class="indent">And as for the results? The scans showed a marked difference between experiment and control—that is, between when the healers were sending ‘good intentions’ and when they were pausing. Clearly measurable changes in brain functions took place with no fewer than nine out of the 11 receivers. Dr Achterberg said that on the monitors one could see that the receivers’ brains ‘lit up like Christmas trees’!</p>
<p class="indent">Much like the telepathy experiment with Sara and Vicky (end of <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>) and the dream-telepathy experiments of Ullman and Krippner (mid <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>), the Hawaii study seems to support the hypothesis that there is, in fact, a non-local connection between people. The researchers discuss possible sources of error, but conclude quite confidently: ‘In summary, these findings support previous research on distant healing suggesting that human intentions may directly affect others in ways that are not entirely understood.’ Skeptics will of course think that the findings—if not due to error or fraud (e.g. that nurses divulged the time schedule of the healers’ sending)—must be due to chance, a statistical fluke. The researchers in turn claim that the odds for such effects to appear based on pure chance are less than 1 in 5,000! And I think it is fair to say that this is where the case stands as of now.</p>
<p class="indent">The Hawaii study was by no means the first time that brain scanning was used in psi research. It is well known that in 1924 the German psychiatrist Hans Berger was the first to measure human brainwaves electronically (animal brainwaves had been measured some years earlier). What is less well known, though, is that Berger had invented his device to detect telepathy! The history behind this was as follows: In the early 1890s Berger was enrolled in the military. There he became the victim of a dramatic and near-fatal accident; in the very same moment his sister, living in another town, got a stark sense that Hans was in peril. She therefore insisted that her father send a telegram to check if he was all right (it was the first telegram the father had ever sent him). Berger writes: ‘It was a case of spontaneous telepathy in which at a time of mortal danger, and as I contemplated certain death, I transmitted my thoughts, while my sister, who was particularly close to me, acted as the receiver.’ So—having survived and having become obsessively curious as to what happens in the brain in connection with telepathic activity, Berger started to study psychology, and many years later he developed his revolutionary electroencephalography (EEG).</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h185"/>Problematic Prayers</p>
<p class="noindent">Apropos distant healing, let me mention that the 2006 April issue of the <i>American Heart Journal</i> presented the results from the so-called STEP—the Study of the Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory Prayer. This was a long-lasting collaborative project between researchers from several prestigious institutions, including Harvard, which evaluated cases pertaining to about 1,800 patients who had gone through coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery (I’m surely no medical doctor, but I think I got it right!). The point was to map the eventual effects of intercessory prayer—in this case prayers from strangers—whose purpose was to reduce complications and mortality following surgery.</p>
<p class="indent">The patients were divided into three groups: 1) those who received prayer after being informed that they may or may not receive prayer; 2) those who did not receive prayer after being informed that they may or may not receive prayer; and 3) those who received prayer after being informed they would receive prayer. The intercessors, those praying, were from different religious backgrounds—Protestant, Catholic and Jewish. They were assigned one patient each, and got to know their patient’s first name and the initial of the last name: ‘Wendy, will you for the next 14 days please pray for the successful recovery of Peter P!’</p>
<p class="indent">And the results? Well, STEP did not show any healing effects of this kind of prayer; in fact, the patients in group 3)—those who were prayed for and who knew that they had been prayed for—had on average slightly more complications than the two other groups! It is not obvious how this should be interpreted (if it was more than just a fluke). It has been suggested that some people get a quite stressful performance anxiety by being prayed for (by strangers): ‘I must not disappoint the kind people who spend time and effort praying for me!’ And also it could be perceived as a make-or-break situation related to God: ‘If I don’t get well, maybe it’s because God doesn’t like me!’</p>
<p class="indent">STEP has been criticized from diverse quarters; for being mere folly (skeptics) and for methodological flaws (psi-positives) and a number of doctors have claimed it is impossible to conclude anything on the basis of STEP. Without going too deeply into the discussion, let me just mention that it is obviously problematic—regrettably, one might think—to assume that the prayers of different people will have equal or even comparable effects. Remote healing will from a parapsychological perspective—mostly—not be thought of as an intervention by non-human powers (it lies outside our book’s framework to discuss such aspects) but rather as a function of the human mind—the workings of our secret powers. There is research supporting that such an ability may exist, e.g. the abovementioned article by Schwartz and Dossey. And if this is the case, it seems likely that—as with any human ability—based on talent and training some people will possess remote healing skills outshining the average. Just as one cannot assume that most people have the same capacity for understanding physics as did Einstein, one cannot assume that average persons have the same capacity for healing prayers/remote healing as, say, an experienced healer or shaman.</p>
<p class="indent">Furthermore: In STEP the intercessors had no personal contact with the patients, and from what we know—or what we think we know—personal connection cannot be disregarded when it comes to psi; rather it seems to be crucial. People report telepathic contact with family and friends and (mostly) not with strangers; people report precognitive dreams concerning family and friends and (mostly) not concerning strangers. Quite obviously, it seems. Therefore, research on prayer ‘by strangers for strangers’—as in STEP—is unsuitable to tell us anything about a) whether individually performed prayers/remote healing have effects and b) who eventually may exercise such effects. With respect to these questions it seems much more relevant to study individual, targeted intentions—just as was done in the Hawaii study. The way to go, then, is probably to conduct a large-scale study partly patterned after the Hawaii study—and, as ‘aloha’ means good wishes and love, what would be more fitting than to conduct it in Hawaii, the Aloha state?—where not only the impact on brainwaves but also the eventual health benefits of the healers’ good intentions are assessed.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h186"/>Leaving the Lab—a Summary</p>
<p class="noindent">Well, we have now served and consumed some tidbits and morsels of what psi research may involve! What conclusions, then, might we reach based on the experiments presented? Some would argue that ESP is substantiated by solid evidence, whereas PK is a somewhat different story. Others would view this the other way round. And yet others will—for different reasons—reject the psi hypothesis altogether and contend that the observed effects should be explained within established theories. Anyway, what <i>can</i> be concluded with absolute certainty is that one doesn’t need to be naive, dishonest nor dimwitted to regard psi as a very valid option to account for a string of otherwise seemingly incomprehensible results.</p>
<p class="indent">Controversial perhaps, but ‘naive, dishonest or dim-witted’ is far from an apt description of the psychologist Hans Eysenck (1916–1997), a professor at King’s College, University of London. Eysenck is considered one of the most important thinkers in modern personality psychology; he authored/co-authored about 80 books and over 1,600 scientific articles (unbelievable!), and at the time of his death he was the world’s most cited psychologist in articles and books. Eysenck was notorious in his positivistic approach: ‘If it cannot be measured, it doesn’t exist!’ He does not seem to have been convinced that <i>every</i> person possesses paranormal abilities, but he was completely certain that some did. At the height of his career he ‘perpetrated’—a psychology professor rarely writes in favor of psi without being indicted by his colleagues—a small book called <i>Are you Psychic?</i> that contains diverse puzzles for testing the sixth sense. This peculiar book came not as a complete bombshell, as Eysenck had already confessed his belief in our secret powers in <i>Sense and Nonsense in Psychology</i> (1958). And with some plainspoken remarks from this book we let Eysenck close the chapter:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Unless there is a gigantic conspiracy involving some thirty University departments all over the world, and several hundred highly respected scientists in various fields, many of them originally hostile to the claims of the psychical researchers, the only conclusion the unbiased observer can come to must be that there does exist a small number of people who obtain knowledge existing either in other people’s minds, or in the outer world, by means as yet unknown to science.*</i></p>
</div>
<p class="note"><i><b>N.B.</b> *We could be right in the middle of a turning of the tides, because the last few years no less than three mainstream scientific journals – The American Psychologist, The Psychology of Consciousness, and The International Journal of Dream Research – have featured lengthy articles with positive assessments of the evidence of telepathy, remote viewing and precognition. Most groundbreaking is likely American Psychologist’s release of ‘The experimental evidence for parapsychological phenomena: A review’. Assessing an enormous amount of research the article’s author, professor Etzel Cardeña of Lund University, Sweden, concludes that, taken as a whole, the studies support that our dear phenomena are real, indeed! American Psychologist is the flagship-journal of the American Psychological Association and is often considered to be the world’s most prestigious psychological journal. So that the editors dare risk its excellent name to print a ‘psi-positive’ article speaks volumes.</i></p>
</body>
</html>