<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>A Short History of (Nearly) Everything Paranormal</title>
<link href="ebook_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bdfdab2c-58c2-4049-ac00-a142ce435838" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="ct1"><a id="h187"/>Chapter 9</h2>
<h2 class="ct3">OUR PARANORMAL DAILY LIFE</h2>
<p class="bq"><i>There are only two ways to live your life: One is as though nothing is a miracle. The other is as if everything is.—I believe in the latter</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Albert Einstein</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h188"/>Introduction: Pearls or Plastic</p>
<p class="noindent">On July 7, 1998 the <i>South China Morning Post</i> (the largest English language newspaper in Hong Kong) printed a piece that could hardly be to the taste of the arch-skeptic James Randi: Masanobu Sakaguchi, the spokesperson for electronics giant Sony, announced that after conducting a multi-year-long research program Sony had reached the conclusion that ESP is a reality! However, Sakaguchi also reported that Sony—for what perhaps could be seen as somewhat trivial reasons—would not proceed with this particular strand of research: ‘We found experimentally that, yes, ESP exists but that any practical application of this knowledge is not likely in the foreseeable future.’</p>
<p class="indent">Most of us are probably far less concerned about the technological and financial implications of ESP than Sony, but even so, perhaps our situation is not entirely different? For even if the scientists who vouch for psi should be right—then what? Aren’t such phenomena, regardless of whether they are objectively real or not, just curiosities—perhaps entertaining, but in the last resort devoid of meaning? Or could these phenomena perhaps have the possibility of conveying a meaning—and a meaning that could not have come from elsewhere?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h189"/>Special Experiences and Special People</p>
<p class="bq"><i>The psychotic drowns in the same waters in which the mystic swims with delight</i></p>
<p class="bq1">~ Joseph Campbell</p>
<p class="noindent">Let’s go back to the work mentioned in the introduction to this book, namely <i>Varieties of Anomalous Experience</i>, which was published by the APA, the American Psychological Association. As we stated, the editors think that anomalous experiences in themselves are not necessarily an ominous sign. And, as also mentioned a couple of times, statistics tell us that more than half of us will experience something outside the ‘normal.’ Hence one is definitely not whacky or otherwise at variance with reality just because one experiences such phenomena! Typically many have related some sort of special <i>meaning</i> connected with their atypical experiences—a feeling they will often describe as ‘spiritual but not religious.’ The editors argue that many psychologists are not sufficiently familiar with such anomalous spiritual experiences as to be able to welcome and embrace them rather than meet them with derision and ridicule. If the field of psychology aspires to encompass our human experience in its fullness, it ought to come up with something better than name-calling—‘dissociation!,’ ‘delusion!,’ ‘psychosis!,’ ‘madness!’—to portray the broad array of unusual occurrences that a human being might experience.</p>
<p class="indent">It seems as though people with extraordinary creative abilities—in the arts, music, science, philosophy, politics—tend to have unusual experiences more often than other people. One likely reason for this is that these creative people to a larger degree dare to open the door to our combined treasure trove and cabinet of horrors, the subconscious mind, from which all sorts of mental content may bubble forth, including experiences of the paranormal. It is no coincidence that the word ‘visionary’—literally, a person who has visions—will often be used to describe creative people of many varieties. Abraham Lincoln was precisely such a visionary, and the poet Walt Whitman, thought him to be a ‘mystical’ man. And as stated in the introduction to this book, Lincoln occasionally felt information about the Civil War was given to him in dreams. The ‘Captain’—as Whitman famously titled Lincoln—seemingly also participated in some of the spiritualistic séances his wife arranged in the White House. Some say Lincoln did this just to please her, while others have argued that Lincoln was genuinely interested in what the medium, while in a trance, could tell about the political agenda of the day.</p>
<p class="indent">If we now throw a glance even further back, to ancient Greece, we will find that Socrates, often considered to be the founding father of Western rationalism, believed he had received a special gift from the gods: an inner voice, a <i>daimon</i> (which in Greek would mean ‘divine force’ rather than ‘demon’), which would instruct him, ‘often warning, rarely impelling.’ The <i>daimon</i> gave him ethical directives and also, at least as Plato portrays it, the strength to drink the cup of hemlock with the greatest serenity after having been sentenced to death.</p>
<p class="indent">Some depictions also suggest that Socrates experienced what we would call psi phenomena related to his <i>daimon</i>. The historian Xenophon, a younger contemporary of Socrates, writes that people said Socrates thought the <i>daimon</i> ‘let him know things, or gave him signs that would let him know them.’ And further that he ‘often would advise those in his company to do certain things and to avoid others, in keeping with the directions given by the <i>daimon</i>.’ Here, Socrates seems to act much more like a psychic adviser than a philosopher! When Xenophon asked Socrates whether or not he ought to join a military campaign, Socrates—completely without irony—referred Xenophon to the Delphic oracle for an answer. Apparently Socrates believed the oracle to be divinely inspired by Apollo, the same god who had provided him with his <i>daimon</i>. So—the incomparable philosophical saint seemingly had a high degree of openness toward anomalous experiences and what we would call psi!</p>
<p class="indent">We could then mention important religious founders such as Buddha, the Jewish prophets, Jesus and Muhammad, who all, according to tradition, had revelations and experienced phenomena of the psi type. Without raising the question as to what degree religious texts can be regarded as historical documents it seems reasonable to assume that the said persons had intense and unusual experiences setting them apart from other people. Within the mentioned traditions it is also taken for granted that not only the founders but also (some of) the followers are going to have similar experiences, whether bestowed as divine gifts or as fruits of prolonged meditative work. Among Christian mystics, Sufis and Kabbalists (i.e. Islamic and Jewish mystics) there are innumerable stories of revelations and paranormal phenomena. And in Buddhism it is thought that all people, at least in principle, may realize their inherent ‘Buddha-nature.’ This may also—even if often regarded as a stumbling block rather than an impetus to growth—involve developing special abilities such as clairvoyance, contact with spirits, etc. And as we heard in <a href="08_chapter03.xhtml">chapter 3</a>, similar stories abound within the shamanic traditions.</p>
<p class="indent">The point of mentioning these people and traditions is to highlight that paranormal phenomena, regardless of whether they are taken to be subjective experiences or objective manifestations, tend to occur around people in contact with ‘the depth dimension’ in life—someone seized by the quest for meaning, by an ‘ultimate concern,’ to use an expression from the philosopher and theologian Paul Tillich. Such a state of mind may be extraordinarily challenging, creating a plethora of emotions, sometimes with such an intensity that makes it nearly impossible to bear. But it may also prove extraordinarily rewarding; as stated by Friedrich Nietzsche: ‘One must still have chaos in oneself to be able to give birth to a dancing star.’</p>
<p class="indent">In the light of the ideas found in <i>Irreducible Mind</i> (see <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>), perhaps it is precisely this chaos, these existential tremors, that sometimes may suspend our otherwise quite rigid filtering, allowing our slumbering abilities to awaken and come to life? Maybe psi can thus sometimes be seen as a herald to new life?—like the shoots, sprouts and buds springing forth when the sap starts to flow after winter, heralding the arrival of the all-rejuvenating spring.</p>
<p class="indent">Of course, there are disturbing and distressing paranormal phenomena—poltergeists, haunted houses, people being possessed, etc. These scary kinds of phenomena are, regrettably, often the ones writers and filmmakers enjoy delving into, fattening their coffers most effectively… But there are, as we have heard, a lot of people who report deeply satisfying paranormal experiences—healing, meaningful telepathic contact with family and friends, helpful warnings through dreams, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">Whether the experience of the paranormal is to become a blessing or a curse will often depend on ‘set and setting.’ That is to say, having a constructive mindset and supportive surroundings could make all the difference. This seems to be the prevailing sentiment within esoteric schools. Thus the ‘awakening person’—the seeker, the initiate, the neophyte—will often seek the supervision of a guru, a sheikh, a rebbe, giving them the advantages as well as the traps (dependency, power-abuse) that typically go with such relationships. Within Western culture, however, it would probably be best to seek out an experienced therapist open to transpersonal perspectives.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h190"/>Intuition—the Synthesis of Normal and Paranormal Abilities?</p>
<p class="noindent">Perhaps the majority of us are a tad more occult than we are usually aware of? Many of us have probably had the experience of thinking of a particular person, one who has been out of both sight and mind for quite some time—weeks, months, perhaps even years—and then, just a few hours later, to receive a call from this very person. Many have also experienced suddenly having an inexplicable worry about a friend or a family member, later to learn that at this particular time the person concerned went through something very unpleasant. Such intuitions might sometimes be caused by the interplay of randomness and the perception of subtle signals, physically or verbally. Perhaps one unconsciously had spotted that Jack was a little paler than normal at the party last weekend. Or perhaps one <i>en passant</i> had—subconsciously—picked up a casual remark that ‘Jack has not looked well lately’ or the like.</p>
<p class="indent">But what if these experiences occur more or less regularly; that again and again one’s hunches prove to be correct? Well, it <i>could</i> of course mean that one is an extremely keen observer. Or, if just a little prone to self-deception, it could mean that one has a touch of <i>apophenia</i>—the tendency to see patterns where there are none, as we discussed in <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>. Or perhaps it could—as this author through the years has become more than ready to consider—be due to our ‘consciousnesses’ being interlinked? That our antennae are much longer than we realize, and that subconsciously sweeping through the ‘mental Facebook’ they might pick up things of interest—as, say, that our old friend Jack has planned to give us a call, or that our dear cousin Jill has just been painfully dumped by her boyfriend? Perhaps this—and infinitely much more—information is virtually ‘in the air.’ If so, our intuition must obviously be much more than just the sum of accumulated experiences. To get a better overview of this somewhat complex theme let’s first have a look at ‘normal’ intuition.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h191"/>Intuition from Logical and Artistic Perspectives</p>
<p class="noindent">In 2006 the leading journal <i>Science</i> published an article called ‘On Making the Right Choice: The Deliberation-Without-Attention Effect,’ by the prize-winning Dutch psychologist A.J. Dijksterhuis (the links to this and the other articles used below are found in the bibliography). The results indicated that in uncomplicated situations—such as, say, when choosing home appliances—<i>reason</i> will be our best counselor; meaning that based on reason we are likely to make choices with which we are happy in hindsight. While in more complex situations, where there are a whole lot of pluses and minuses to be weighed against each other—for example when choosing a roommate, purchasing an expensive car, or even a house—Dijksterhuis believes it will often be favorable for us to resort to ‘unconscious thought.’ By this he means using a slow-working kind of intuition (and <i>not</i> the fast-working intuition described by Daniel Kahneman, as we will see below).</p>
<p class="indent">The reason Dijksterhuis makes such a recommendation is that we are able to process far greater amounts of information unconsciously than consciously. Perceiving and relating to <i>the essence</i> in a situation of choice—which out of these six cars should I buy? Ought I to move in with this particular person?—is when ‘unconscious thought’ may prove more helpful than mere logical thinking. This applies only if you first take the time and effort to garner the necessary facts and data so that your unconscious mind has sufficient and relevant material available to work with. But after having familiarized yourself thoroughly with the situation, you should not engage in endless brooding and analyzing—what we usually call ‘overthinking’—as this, according to Dijksterhuis, may cause you to lose perspective, leaving you wrapped and trapped in outsized concerns for trifles.</p>
<p class="indent">In an interview with the <i>Harvard Business Review</i> in 2007 Dijksterhuis said:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Use your conscious mind to acquire all the information you need for making a decision—but don’t try to analyze the information. Instead, go on holiday while your unconscious mind digests it for a day or two. Whatever your intuition then tells you is almost certainly going to be the best choice</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Dijksterhuis holds that this kind of intuitive processing is often derided by those who feel compelled to verbalize the reasons for their choices. In the article ‘A Theory of Unconscious Thought’ Dijksterhuis writes:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>A major reason that people distrust intuition is the belief, which is often implicitly held, that intuitions are snap judgments that arrive in the consciousness with little or no prior information processing. However, such a belief may not be justified. In many cases, intuitions may well be the result of extensive unconscious thought. Intuitions are the summary judgments the unconscious gives us when it is ready to decide</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Intuitive decision-making should not be carried out lightly, though. There are prerequisites that should be in place to ensure the quality of your decisions. To that effect Dijksterhuis suggests we ask ourselves two questions. The first is: ‘Did I give myself enough time to engage in unconscious thought?’ If you conclude that yes, you probably have given your unconscious mind sufficient time for processing, then ask yourself the second question: ‘Did I have all the important information, or are there additional things I really need to know first?’ If you think you have all the information you need, Dijksterhuis says: ‘Go with your intuition. It likely is the best advice you will get.’</p>
<p class="indent">Similar advice is often given to us in fairytales: To be able to win the princess, the Ash Lad—the poor but skillful young man who is the hero in many Norwegian folktales—once needed to build a vessel able to ‘fare on water, on land, and in the air as well’—obviously a very demanding task. The Ash Lad wanders out in the woods and close to a giant oak tree he meets an old man (a symbol for his own higher self?) with whom he shares his food. In return the old man gives him the following guidance:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>‘Now, chop out a chip of wood [from the oak tree], and then put it back just where it sat, and when you’ve done that, you can go to sleep.’ Yes, the Ash Lad did as the man said, then he lay down to sleep. And in his sleep he thought he could hear the noise from hewing and hammering and sawing and crafting, but he couldn’t wake up until the man woke him up. Then the ship stood fully finished along with the oak</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">There is always a risk in overanalyzing the poetry of a story, finding things that are not really there, but I’ll take the chance. I think the ‘hewing and hammering and sawing and crafting’ that the Ash Lad heard in the background were the mighty, unconscious processes. In fact, Dijksterhuis has stated that we unconsciously are able to process about 200,000 times as much information as we are able to do consciously! The superlative example of this outrageous capacity is the savants’ unbelievable but proven feats in calculation and memory (<a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>). When the normal, rigid ego filtering is partly suspended—either by autism or in various other ways (the Ash Lad had to go to sleep to get the vessel built)—the untethered and unreined unconscious mind is able to perform some really mind-blowing amazing stunts.</p>
<p class="indent">However, the Nobel laureate psychologist Daniel Kahneman does not think relying on intuition is always a boon. In his erudite and widely recognized book, <i>Thinking, Fast and Slow</i>, Kahneman maintains that when making decisions we think in two different ways. Either we think ‘fast’ (intuitive, feeling-based) or we think ‘slow’ (analytical, logical). When we think ‘fast’ our judgments are to a great extent based on our previous experiences. Hence we use our ready-made clichés with the advantages (speed) and drawbacks (lack of nuances) that go with them. Many who act on intuition, says Kahneman, are therefore simply not in touch with <i>the present situation</i> and its specifics. Rather, they are ‘living on memories’—and are proud of it! In addition, Kahneman believes he has demonstrated that intuitive assessments often suffer from ‘optimism bias,’ meaning that decisions based on intuition tend to be overly optimistic. Trite but true: misplaced optimism may easily lead to ugly results—in traffic, in politics, in the stock market, etc.</p>
<p class="indent">Dijksterhuis and Kahneman thus seem to be in profound disagreement as Dijksterhuis explicitly recommends that complex decisions be taken based on intuition, while Kahneman spots trouble in the offing whenever intuition is given primacy over analytical deliberation. To sort out the matter I contacted Dijksterhuis, who told me that he and Kahneman, in fact, are speaking about different things: Kahneman distinguishes, as mentioned above, between two kinds of thinking, fast and slow. While Dijksterhuis distinguishes between <i>three</i> types of thinking: fast and slow (much like Kahneman), but moreover an even slower form, working unconsciously, as we discussed above in connection with the Ash Lad. And, according to Dijksterhuis, Kahneman does not take this type of slow, unconscious thinking into consideration at all.</p>
<p class="indent">So, to Kahneman, ‘intuition’ means instant thinking based on memory—a pattern recognition happening in the blink of an eye, typically without the need for acquiring new information. For example, decisions of the kind that experienced pilots make when sitting at the controls; they know the situation in and out, thus they will intuitively—in Kahneman’s sense of the word—know how to deal with almost any possible issue. Whereas to Dijksterhuis ‘intuition’ refers to those prolonged unconscious processes so often prized by creative persons such as artists, inventors and entrepreneurs—for example the Apple founder Steve Jobs, who spoke warmly about intuition and who, as many probably will know, had a related interest in mysticism and altered states of consciousness. (Jobs said that Bill Gates would have become more creative if he’d tried LSD…) I would guess Jobs was not so much interested in Kahneman’s intuition (recognizing established patterns) as he was in Dijksterhuis’ intuition (creating new patterns).</p>
<p class="indent">Dijksterhuis explained that people involved in such unconscious processes will typically use even more time than Kahneman does when he is ‘thinking slowly.’ But unlike Kahneman’s slow thinking, these processes are—as stated above—not about protracted logical analysis but about allowing for fermentation and maturation in the unconscious mind. And only when this brewing process is reaching completion will it be time to ‘go with your gut.’</p>
<p class="indent">Such maturation may result in ‘reframing’ and an ‘escape to a higher level’ as it is sometimes called within systems theory, meaning that one will intuitively (in Dijksterhuis’ sense) see the issue in question in a new and liberating way. Understanding the connection between A and B (analysis) is important when you want to go from A to B. But sometimes it will be even more important to see both A and B in a new light (reframing). Doing so, you may find that you are not so interested in going to B after all but would rather like to go to C! For example, rather than deciding to buy this or that fancy car, you might suddenly surprise yourself by thinking, No, I’d rather buy a bike as I will feel freer if I don’t increase my mortgage. And that freedom—and getting in shape—is more important for me than keeping up with the Joneses.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps the reason why Kahneman and Dijksterhuis differ in their approach to intuition could be traced back to their different personalities? Kahneman seems, in writing and in interviews, to be an utterly analytical and logical person; he so loves to expose the fallacies of intuition (as he understands the concept), and his book contains some funny (and important) examples. Whereas Dijksterhuis appears to be more of an artistic and even bohemian type. In practical play the difference is probably not decisive, though, as both recommend that we, in addition to being well informed, take our time when making complex decisions.</p>
<p class="indent">This is hardly a shocking new insight for most of us, but maybe it is good to have it put on a solid foundation. Links can be found in the bibliography to some pertinent articles. To get the most out of them you should probably first—as Kahneman prescribes—think slowly through their content, and then—in keeping with Dijksterhuis’ recommendations—do something else and let the material get a good and long unconscious maturation!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h192"/>Intuition from an Occult Perspective</p>
<p class="noindent">In this book ‘intuition’ is used in a broad sense that smoothly encompasses both Kahneman’s and Dijksterhuis’ ideas, and where the essence would be ‘the feeling of knowing but without quite knowing why you know.’ A couple of examples: ‘Well, I met my sister’s new boyfriend yesterday, and immediately I just knew he was a psychopath—I don’t know why!’ (Perhaps it was the sadistic glint in his eye similar to that of another, formerly met, psychopath?) ‘When I woke up this morning I just knew I needed to change jobs—I don’t know why!’ (Perhaps a long repressed need for a quieter lifestyle had surfaced in a dream?). The question is of course whether such intuitions, such gut feelings, only stem from the conscious and unconscious learning from past experiences. Or if in addition telepathy, clairvoyance and precognition might enter the picture and ‘fortify’ one’s intuition, have it working ‘on steroids,’ such as occultists think is possible. Our intuition would then become a sixth sense.</p>
<p class="indent">As we have heard, many parapsychologists—Ryzl, Lozanov, Parker, Radin, Bierman, Bem and others—think this is the case. They think psi is doing its job silently in the background, unconsciously, sometimes allowing paranormal information to seep (mostly undetected) into and blend with our usual mental processes. Only a few of us have visions <i>à la</i> the prophets and mystics, but most of us will from time to time have intuitions, gut feelings, and hunches which, based on the understanding mentioned above, will sometimes contain paranormal information. Maybe this is why ‘unconscious thinking’ and gut feelings can help us make decisions that are remarkably clairvoyant (perhaps even literally). The experiments of Radin, Bierman and Bem are suggestive of just that.</p>
<p class="indent">Imagine that you have been looking at an attractive house and consider buying it. Then, suddenly you get a weird sensation that something is wrong. Such a feeling may of course be nothing more than a whim. But applying the occult perspective on intuition, one would want to take such a vibe a little seriously, and perhaps ask oneself some questions, such as: ‘Could it be clairvoyance/clairsentience that is giving me this rotten feeling, signaling that the apparent dream house is a nightmare of undetected rot?’ Or, ‘Maybe it is telepathy that is giving me this feeling that the broker is not telling me all that I ought to know?’ Or, ‘Perhaps precognition is occasioning this weird <i>déjà vu</i> (French = already seen), warning me that trouble could be about to happen?’</p>
<p class="indent">In addition to the lab experiments conducted by Radin, Bierman, Bem et al., a paranormal perspective on intuition is also suggested in the diverse field cases we have discussed, as for instance Elizabeth Lloyd Mayer’s experience with the lost harp (<a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>). Kahneman thinks that the ‘seeming magic’ of intuition is merely due to its capitalization on large amounts of accumulated experiences. But the kind of intuition that was demonstrated to Mayer—the dowser was located in another city where he specified the whereabouts of the harp using a pendulum over a map—can obviously not be explained by former experience, fast or slow thinking. Here we are talking real clairvoyance or real deception! Mayer was a recognized and respected psychologist, and the introduction to her book was written by the maverick physicist and mathematician Freeman Dyson. In other words, there are hardly good reasons to believe she is deceiving us.</p>
<p class="indent">And it has become clear during our extensive hike in the borderland of consciousness, Mayer is by no means alone; there are many presumably credible and resourceful persons who have recounted experiences of related kinds. Thus, perhaps it is the occultists’ perspective—viewing intuition as a seamless synthesis of our normal and paranormal abilities—that may provide us with the most satisfactory understanding.</p>
<p class="indent">Well, whether we choose to listen mostly to Dijksterhuis, Kahneman or to the occultists, they all seem to agree that our intuition should not be dominated by Hopes or Fears, the two largest sources of error when assessing information, normal or paranormal. This is probably one of the reasons that from time to time we should put all thoughts of decision-making aside and simply ‘sleep on it.’ Just as was taught us by no less than the Ash Lad himself!</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h193"/>DIY</p>
<p class="noindent">Given that the occultists’ perspective on intuition is relevant—is there anything we could do to make our intuition more open to ESP? Can we learn to know gold from garbage, diamonds from dust, distinguishing fanciful neurosis from truthful intuition? Can we, in other words, go from five-sensory to six-sensory functioning? If we choose to say, somewhat like the military did when setting up Stargate: ‘Well, maybe this could be possible,’ then the esoteric schools—Kabbalists, Sufis, Rosicrucians, Hermeticists, etc.—have exciting schemes to offer us, as over the centuries they have developed methods of training precisely for this purpose.</p>
<p class="indent">The easiest technique of all is doing deliberate guesswork. Empty your mind of thoughts as much as possible and guess: What’s in the letter that the mail carrier just delivered? Who’s calling right now? What is it that he/she wants? Who is going to win the game tonight? What will the scenery be like at our holiday destination? In short, guess at all and everything, but preferably at that which you cannot know in the usual way! Afterwards, write down and evaluate your scores. If there is to be any point in such an exercise, one must of course be uncompromisingly honest; this is the only way that—if at all possible—one may learn to tell the difference between true ‘downloads’ and fanciful imagination.</p>
<p class="indent">Errors will be abundant, but have no worries: shedding the fear of mistakes is part of the training. If the esoteric masters are right, slowly but surely one will develop a ‘taste’ for quality and truth, and thus one’s score will supposedly get better. When learning to play the guitar or the piano you will make many mistakes at first. But eventually your fingers will find the right positions with greater ease, and your ear will also become more precise and nuanced. After some time, chances are that you will get the chords right much of the time. And you will also hear whether your instrument is out of tune, or if the strings resound with that magical, silvery sound, that Orpheus got from his lute.</p>
<p class="indent">However, talent is unevenly distributed in the world, and there is no reason to think that an eventual sixth sense should be an exception to this rule. Given that psi is real, it seems reasonable to think that most of us—figuratively speaking—could learn to play for pleasure, but far fewer will be talented enough to be musicians, and only rarely will a person or group be able to develop the necessary qualities for creating a new craze. Perhaps one could say that from an occult perspective people function basically in one of three ways: Some work ‘offline,’ filtering out practically all information from the Mental Internet. Others, probably most of us, download information to a greater or lesser extent, usually without thinking about it, as has been suggested by Radin, Bierman, Bern, Parker, et al. While the third group both utilize this special kind of information and are also very much aware that they are doing it. It is of course such people who will often be referred to as ‘psychics’ or ‘paragnosts.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h194"/>Becoming a Real Psychic?</p>
<p class="noindent">Perhaps some readers have a more ambitious goal than just to spice up their intuition, and want to dedicate a serious amount of time, effort and even money trying to develop their paranormal abilities to their full potential so as to be able to excel in telepathy, clairvoyance, healing, telekinesis, astral projection, etc. To what extent this will be possible I can’t say—traditionally it is often held that the true psychic or magician is born, not created—but it is certainly possible to go from dreaming about it to start experimenting!</p>
<p class="indent">Given that it should be possible to attain some degree of success with a project of this type, one should probably consider whether such an expansion of consciousness is something one is truly ready for. As we have heard, experienced psychics tell of the strain that goes with constantly ‘taking in’ human pain, grief, anxiety, and also forebodings about unpleasant future events. During WWI, Rudolf Steiner, the Austrian esoteric teacher, was contacted by a flight commander who, before the missions started, would ‘see’ among the pilots those who would be killed. And he was often right. This was a great burden to him, hence he asked Steiner to help him ‘shut down’ his precognitions. (Steiner prescribed some specific mental exercises that reportedly accomplished the task.)</p>
<p class="indent">And if, for example, you should succeed in developing healing skills, you are likely to get unsolicited calls 24/7, and I promise your social life will never be the same. Hereafter you will be continually confronted with the ‘doctor’s dilemma’: ‘Oh, this back of mine! I’ve heard you’re into healing; could I ask if you would just very quickly, etc.’ On the other hand, maybe you think your psi abilities already are somewhat active and it feels right to initiate a closer cooperation with them? Or maybe you feel the need for something new, a plunge into the unknown, thus expanding your horizons in this direction seems promising?</p>
<p class="indent">There are lots of ‘psychic gyms’ of different brands and qualities; let me briefly mention a couple which I think are serious.</p>
<p class="indent">Many who work with cultivating ESP claim to have benefited from the Silva courses. Here you will learn techniques for relaxation and ‘going to alpha,’ i.e. learning to regulate (to some degree) your brainwaves, thus changing your mental gears. You will also learn to sort your inner stream of images, words and sensations where the ESP information might possibly show up. Silva courses have been tried and tested for quite some time; however, they are fairly expensive, and results cannot be guaranteed.</p>
<p class="indent">An esoteric school sharing their occult skills on quite idealistic grounds is Servants of the Light (SOL)—an offshoot of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (mentioned in <a href="10_chapter05.xhtml">chapter 5</a>). However, their courses progress slowly as they want you to mature personally in parallel with developing psychic abilities. Hence you will have to digest far more esoteric philosophy than most of us are motivated for.</p>
<p class="indent">Anyway, it is probably best to take the first steps peacefully in the safety of your own home, becoming familiar with some of the extensive how-to literature on psychic skills. As mentioned, a simple instruction in remote viewing is found in the links to <a href="07_chapter02.xhtml">chapter 2</a>. It will also be useful to learn to relax at will—meditation, yoga and autogenic training are proven aids. Many people also tell of the benefits from using soundtracks with ‘binaural tones’ that utilize so-called ‘brain entrainment.’ As with shamanic drumming, these sounds are intended to alter your brainwave pattern so as to trigger relaxation and/or induce altered states of consciousness. The two most well-tested systems are probably Holosync and Hemisync. (Personally, I have used the former, and with some quite good effects.)</p>
<p class="indent">If I should dare to recommend a specific book to help in becoming psychic I think, in fact, it would have to be <i>Becoming Psychic: Spiritual Lessons for Focusing Your Hidden Abilities</i>, by Stephen Kierulff with contributions from Stanley Krippner. Kierulff is an experienced psychologist who has published articles in peer-reviewed journals; Krippner needs no further introduction. In a laid-back way Kierulff gives us snapshots from physical and psychical journeys during which he—much to his own surprise—managed to develop (some) abilities for extrasensory perception (as he sees it). He recounts many personal psychic experiences of different kinds, and suggests targeted exercises for the reader: how to open up for telepathy, how to develop foresight, etc. Each chapter is equipped with enlightening and entertaining comments from the expert Krippner.</p>
<p class="indent">Seeing is believing—and often believing is seeing. At the end of his book Kierulff provides contact information for a number of psychics he assumes (though cannot fully guarantee) are the real deal. If you doubt whether psychic functioning really exists at all, Kierulff suggests that you test out some of these folks. And when/if you then meet a person who proves able to provide you with information that he/she could not possibly have acquired in any customary way this, according to Kierulff, will make it easier for you to activate your own extrasensory perception. (If you constantly repeat to yourself that ‘extrasensory perception is bogus!’ this will of course make you prone to overlook possible impressions of this kind.)</p>
<p class="indent">If you are starting out on the road to paragnosis, it is probably wise to remind yourself that these are not ‘divine’ qualities that—if real—will make you able to ‘see’ every number in the Australian phone directory or pinpoint the correct Lottery combinations. Surprisingly many people think that since such feats cannot readily be achieved, extrasensory perception must surely be synonymous to extrasensory deception. Our proposal, however, which is based on the model of the Mental Internet, makes it possible to find a middle ground between the extremes of believe-all or believe-nothing. We suggest that such abilities might very well be real and—if sufficient talent and training is in place—occasionally can bring about astonishing results. But at the same time we mustn’t forget that they, like any other human skills, are not infallible; <i>errare humanum est</i> (to err is human) as the ancient Romans used to say. Even the best batter can’t be expected to hit the ball every time. Accordingly it is unreasonable to expect that a psychic will have hits on all occasions. What <i>is</i> reasonable, however, is to expect that those who present themselves as professionals—be they batters or be they psychics—should have far more hits than the rest of us. This leads us quite naturally to the next section.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h195"/>Costly Truths?—Professional Psychics</p>
<p class="noindent">Via telephone, internet, letters and personal consultations, professional psychics are running multi-multi-million-dollar schemes worldwide. Without going too deeply into the matter I would like to share some brief reflections. Among the obvious dangers within the psychic business are the professional cheaters. Some readers may recall the Maria Duval scam, apparently managed by an international network of con-psychics. Clients all over the world—often vulnerable people with health problems, in existential crises, etc.—were swindled, paying exorbitantly for ‘psychic’ services. In the US and Canada alone the amount of money involved in this mail fraud scheme is estimated to have been a whopping $200 million. Another scam is Rinalda—‘she’ is a computer—who impresses many visiting ‘her’ website by imparting such things as ‘You will soon approach London’—a feat which ‘she’ performs by logging into your computer’s IP address. (I once used a proxy server to move my IP address to Kuala Lumpur, a move that for some reason left the poor girl completely confused…)</p>
<p class="indent">Fortunately, such cases are rare. More common are ‘honest liars’—people who believe themselves to be psychic but who do not deliver. This does not necessarily mean that they are completely devoid of talent; from the perspective we employ in this book almost all humans have psychic abilities to some degree. But the ‘honest liars’ typically overestimate their skills, either because of naivety or because of ego, conveying much muck with their grains of gold. The ads for telephone psychic services are often found right next to the ads for sex services. If we should interpret this as some kind of a meaningful coincidence, it could probably be explicated as follows.</p>
<p class="indent">There are certain natural phenomena that people may want more of in their lives. It cannot be excluded that the person on the other end of the line has some relevant skills, but one also ought to know that in such contexts the supplied goods will often be of very poor quality.</p>
<p class="indent">If one accepts this, it will perhaps—if one should feel a need for any of these stimuli—be possible to enjoy both types of service. The one type of line may—if you are lucky—perhaps provide you with an experience of extrasensory perception. While the other type of line will usually be limited to experiences of pure (or impure) sensory perception.</p>
<p class="indent">Many of the professional psychics are people who have been around for a while, and some of them are quite competent as coaches. Thus they will often provide their clients with a much-needed pat on the back when going through hard times. The danger is of course a possible addiction that can be unhealthy both for soul and for wallet (but, as we know, this will apply to several of our more routine pleasures as well…). Many will also attribute much too much weight to the words of psychics. If, say, a bureaucrat should happen to drop a stupid comment in passing it will usually be an easy matter to shake it off. But if the idiotic remark is made by a professional psychic, a person who reputedly has strong intuitive abilities, then it might not perhaps be that easy to ignore. A scene from the French comic album <i>Asterix and the Soothsayer</i> now comes to mind: An augur, a Roman priest and soothsayer, is performing his rituals before a pleased-looking Caesar and his adopted son, Brutus, who is fiddling with a dagger… The augur solemnly declares: ‘As long as Brutus is near you, O Caesar, you will have nothing to fear!’</p>
<p class="indent">At last it should be mentioned: When a person feels utterly alone and deeply distressed, perhaps even on the verge of suicide, and desperately needs another human being to talk to, it may—especially during the night—be difficult to pick up the phone and call friends or family, or a mental health service. In such situations many have chosen to call a 24/7 psychic line—and many have also received help. Perhaps one’s primary need was to break the loneliness, something that could have been accomplished by chatting with just about anybody? Or maybe the person who came on the line was a real intuitive, being able to ‘tune in,’ to find the right words and provide consoling perspectives not readily available from an average person? An elderly man, who for a couple of decades has been working on a psychic line, once told me that ‘when the weekend comes the suicide candidates will call, and I don’t let them off the line before I hear their pills being flushed down the drain!’ Those of you who treat your clients in this way, regardless of whether or not you are psychic, be thanked, for you have saved lives.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h196"/>One Heretic, Two Books, Four Legs and Six Senses—Rupert Sheldrake and His Ideas</p>
<p class="noindent">Many people have related stories of having a close, yes, almost a telepathic contact with animals. Is this just a result of projection, or could such contact really be possible? According to, for example, the Indian Vedanta philosophy, as outlined in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>, consciousness is not something peculiar to humans; rather it belongs to Nature itself, and is part of all life to varying degrees (and perhaps it could even be latent in ‘dead’ matter). And if we accept the ideas of Daryl Bem found in ‘Feeling the Future’—where he suggested that ESP is part of an evolutionary survival kit—there is no reason why animals shouldn’t have the capacity for extrasensory perception. And maybe they might even be more proficient at these feats than us while leading a life more in tune with nature.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h197"/>Telepathy—a Shared Language Between All Living Beings</p>
<p class="noindent">One who advocates such a position is the British biologist Dr Rupert Sheldrake. Having a very solid academic background, Sheldrake is by no means a typical fringe theorist; for six years he was Director of Studies in biochemistry and cell biology at Clare College, Cambridge University. But as the years have gone by Sheldrake has become more and more controversial, primarily because of his ideas on evolution, which he ascribes to ‘morphic resonance’—a natural circuit of non-local information, closely resembling telepathy.</p>
<p class="indent">Sheldrake first put forth his heretical thoughts with the article ‘A New Science of Life’ in the <i>New Scientist</i>, June 1981. The science writer Colin Tudge then wrote an editorial that presented Sheldrake’s thoughts under the incendiary heading: ‘Scientific proof that science has got it all wrong.’ About a week later, Sheldrake released his book <i>A New Science of Life: The Hypothesis of Formative Causation</i>. The sequel, <i>The Presence of the Past: Morphic Resonance and the Habits of Nature</i>, was released in 1988. I remember finding and buying this latter book at the University of Oslo bookstore when I was a student in the early 1990s, the back page sporting a panegyric blurb reading something like: ‘If reading this book, in 50 years you’ll be able to say, I was there!’ More than 25 years have passed since then and the book has gained very solid traction within ‘alternative’ milieux. Perhaps before the next 25 years are up it will have gained recognition within regular academia also?</p>
<p class="indent">In the aforementioned two books Sheldrake discusses much complex biochemistry and genetics—spheres where I fear to tread. Thus the following is just a simple summary of the main features of his thinking.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h198"/>Heretical Core Ideas</p>
<p class="noindent">Sheldrake maintains that evolution does not happen out of the blue; on the contrary, there is a feedback circle at work—meaning that Nature somehow learns from its experiences with itself. The original scientific version of this strain of thought is called ‘Lamarckism,’ named after the French biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829). The problem that has always haunted Lamarckism is to explain <i>how</i> such learning takes place—what is the mechanism causing this alleged natural self-schooling? Sheldrake believes he has answers to offer, namely his theory of ‘formative causation.’</p>
<p class="indent">He postulates that Nature is governed by ‘habits’ that give all organisms their structures, shapes and functions. Evolution, says Sheldrake, is the build-up and development of these habits via ‘morphic fields.’ These are fields of information generated by the experiences had by generations and generations of organisms. For example crocodiles: When millions of crocodiles make ‘deposits’ of information (their experiences of hunting, mating, sensations, pleasure, fear, etc.) in the collective memory bank, their descendants will become the beneficiaries of the heritage. This means that today’s crocodiles are ‘in-formed’ (shaped, directed, governed, modified, etc.) by these fields. And their experiences will in turn make new ‘deposits’ in the collective memory bank. Ad infinitum. This feedback circle of information does of course not only apply to crocodiles, but to all species in nature ranging from single-celled organisms to mammals. And that’s the way of the world!</p>
<p class="indent">The exchange that takes place between the ‘morphic crocodile field’ and the crocodiles is, as mentioned, called ‘morphic resonance.’ This resonance is very tempting to describe as ‘Nature’s telepathic education of itself.’ Sheldrake explains that:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>organisms are subject to an influence from previous similar organisms by a process called morphic resonance. Through morphic resonance, each member of a species draws upon, and in turn contributes to, a pooled or collective memory. Thus, for example, if animals learn a new skill in one place, similar animals raised under similar conditions should subsequently tend to learn the same thing more readily all over the world</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Sheldrake does not use the t-word in this connection; in ‘normal’ telepathy the exchanges of information take place between individual senders and receivers. But he has stated that he thinks telepathy, which he warmly espouses, can be seen as an expression of the same type of non-local communication as is morphic resonance. And the good Sheldrake goes further: He thinks that inanimate, ‘dead’ matter—for example the structure of crystals—also develops as part of nature’s ever-evolving habits. And in the last resort, Sheldrake holds, even the natural laws themselves are habits—formed over enormous time spans. In keeping with this Sheldrake thinks that several of the so-called ‘constants’ in nature—for instance the ‘big G,’ a formula which describes the gravitational force between two bodies—are not that constant after all.</p>
<p class="indent">Sheldrake’s scientific research is informed by the works of older scientists such as Hans Spemann (Nobel laureate in Medicine/Physiology, 1935), Alexander Gurwitsch (biologist/physiologist, likely the originator of the concept ‘morphic field’) and Paul Albert Weiss (biologist, recipient of the American Medal of Science). Moreover, Sheldrake has cited C.G. Jung, with his ideas about ‘the collective unconscious’ that we discussed in <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">chapter 4</a>, as an influence. Sheldrake developed his seminal thoughts during a period when he headed the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, a plant research center in Hyderabad, India. Later he spent some time in an <i>ashram</i>, a spiritual workshop. And some of Sheldrake’s ideas definitely have a whiff of Vedanta. For example, he regards consciousness to be inherent in Nature (and so it also has to be, I guess, since we—conscious human beings—are a part of Nature). Sheldrake has said his thinking has also been inspired by an eccentric, philosophical lady—a kind of elderly female Mowgli—who lived in an old house teeming with birds and other animals, and where wasps were allowed to build their nests unhindered!</p>
<p class="indent">Morphic resonance may help to explain why Life has not been standing still but in fact has evolved dramatically. After all, it is an extremely long way (in most cases, that is…) from amoebae aswim in the primordial ocean to space-traveling humans! This evolution cannot, according to Sheldrake, be accounted for just by chanting the Darwinian mantra ‘survival of the fittest.’ Surely, the un-fits will die out. But—thinking about it, innumerable simple life forms are obviously better fitted for their kind of life than we humans are for ours. Thus they have had no real reason to evolve, so it seems. So what, then, is the impetus for evolution to happen at all? Could it be, as Sheldrake imagines, that the morphic fields gradually grow over time, and as they in-fluence and in-form organisms, generation after generation, pushing and pulling them ever so slowly, ever so slightly—thus molding their genetics over millions of years—, Life on Earth will be led in the direction of more complex forms and higher levels of consciousness?</p>
<p class="indent">To validate his ideas Sheldrake has cited among other experiments a classic designed by William McDougall (featured early in <a href="13_chapter08.xhtml">chapter 8</a>). This experiment, which was conducted at Harvard, allegedly showed that when a breed of laboratory rats managed to solve a problem (finding their way through a particular maze) their counterparts in laboratories in Scotland and Australia would be able to solve the same problem a little more quickly. If this really should be the case, ‘morphic resonance’ might be a possible explanation. When the first rats solve the puzzle their insight becomes a part of the ‘morphic field’ and the other rats can, to some extent, ‘download’ and utilize the first rats’ experiences.</p>
<p class="indent">But this doesn’t end with the rats, mind you! It turns out that ever since standardized IQ tests were introduced, new generations score higher than their predecessors. This effect, which isn’t overly big but still is recognized as a fact, is called the ‘Flynn effect.’ According to Sheldrake, the Flynn effect cannot be accounted for just by the—acknowledged—increased stimulation through the media, electronic gadgets, schooling or the like. While in light of morphic resonance this scenario is exactly what we should expect! Our collective memory bank has received lots of ‘deposits’ by all the IQ tests that have been carried out over the years, thus our morphic field has been more ‘educated.’ Hence today’s humans—through morphic resonance, nature’s internal telepathic education—will benefit when taking <i>their</i> IQ tests.</p>
<p class="indent">As an extension of his basic ideas Sheldrake suggests that collectives, swarms and shoals also make daily use of this kind of direct ‘telepathic’—as it were—information; for instance, when the ants in an anthill coordinate their immensely complex activities. There are experiments that, according Sheldrake, suggest that genetic programs and chemical signals alone cannot fully explain the complex communication and exchange of information that are obviously taking place between the ants. Some early entomologists (insect researchers) thought likewise and suggested that an anthill, a beehive, a termite mound, etc. may be seen as a <i>super-organism</i>, where the individual insects can be regarded as the cells constituting the organism, and where a kind of group telepathy helps to organize the whole thing.</p>
<p class="indent">The same goes for fish and birds. In the 1980s the American researcher Wayne Potts filmed flocks of dunlins and afterwards examined their movements, frame by frame. According to Sheldrake, Potts found that</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>the rate of propagation of what he [Potts] calls the ‘maneuver wave’ is extremely fast: about 20 milliseconds from bird to bird. This is much faster than the birds’ minimum reaction time to stimuli. He measured their startle reaction time using dunlins in the laboratory in dark or dim light. He set off photographic flashbulbs and measured how long it took the birds to react. He found that it took the individual birds about 80–100 milliseconds; that is, they reacted as individuals four to five times more slowly than the rate at which the maneuver wave moved from bird to bird</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">So, according to Sheldrake, the coordinated movements of the birds are simply going much too fast to be ascribed to the normal visual reading of the flight patterns of their ‘wing men.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h199"/>A Book for Burning?</p>
<p class="noindent">On the eve of the launch of <i>A New Science of Life</i> in 1981 the <i>New Scientist</i>’s editorial said that Sheldrake’s ideas were off the beaten track, but that ‘the science in his ideas is good […] This does not mean that it is right but that it is testable.’ Colin Tudge introduced him as a polymath, ‘Sheldrake is an excellent scientist; the proper, imaginative kind that in an earlier age discovered continents and mirrored the world in sonnets.’ However, a little later <i>Nature</i> responded quite differently. Sheldrake’s ideas obviously stuck in the craw of the editor, Sir John Maddox. His review, which is close to a writ of summons, had the ominous headline: ‘A Book for Burning?’ Maddox wrote that, ‘This infuriating tract […] is the best candidate for burning there has been for many years.’ And further, that it was ‘ridiculous’ to claim that such a hypothesis could be tested, and that the experiments Sheldrake suggested would be inconclusive.</p>
<p class="indent">Maddox did not conclude that the book ought to be burned, though—he in fact says ‘Books rightly command respect […] even bad books should not be burned; […] [Dr Sheldrake’s] book should not be burned.’ But still, the mighty Maddox employing this inquisitorial and bigoted rhetoric stamped Sheldrake as a heretic fielding a ‘science from Hell.’ This sulfuric attack greatly contributed to the ruin of Shedrake’s, until then, untainted reputation.</p>
<p class="indent">One may wonder if Maddox here really was in his sound scientific mind, and some of <i>Nature</i>’s readers also reacted to what they perceived to be an irrational rant. Maddox did not relent, though, and followed up later by explicitly naming Sheldrake’s thoughts ‘heresy.’ This is certainly strange vocabulary for a science editor, because in contrast to religious dogma the essence of science is applying (as far as possible) neutral methods, formulating hypotheses, designing experiments and running tests. As long as one makes one’s theory testable—which Sheldrake had done by proposing specific experiments—any theory may be brought to the table. In a later review Maddox, still being sulfurous, accused Sheldrake of lack of controls during the experiments. As a response Sheldrake invited Maddox to attend the trials to see for himself. But not only did Maddox not accept—he did not even reply.</p>
<p class="indent">One thing is <i>scientific</i> disagreement, but what is surprising is how irrationally vexed some people become by Sheldrake. By many he is seemingly perceived as a traitor to the ‘true teaching’—the prevailing theories in biology. Irrationality may well fester in the crannies of rationality and if one is perceived as having committed high treason one runs the risk of being hanged, drawn and quartered by the self-avowed guardians of science. In 2008 Sheldrake, after giving a lecture in New Mexico, was stabbed by a Japanese attendee. The attacker claimed that Sheldrake had tried to control him by telepathy so clearly mental health issues were in the picture. But still, mainstream academics very seldom encounter accusations of this type.</p>
<p class="indent">Regardless of the controversy that surrounded Sheldrake, some highly competent scientists have been fascinated by his ideas and have bravely defied the taboo of not touching the unclean. Steven Rose, the English biologist and neuroscientist, conducted experiments with Sheldrake during the 1990s, but an agreement on how the results should be interpreted was not reached. Sheldrake also received support from the great physicist David Bohm (briefly presented in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>). Bohm believed that Sheldrake’s ideas meshed well with his own theory of Nature as an explicate manifestation of an implicate order (the morphic fields).</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h200"/>Revenged by the People</p>
<p class="noindent">First and foremost Sheldrake has exacted his revenge through the large fan base he has acquired among lay people. He is an accomplished educator, and his later books are aimed at a general readership. He has suggested many entertaining low-budget experiments for testing telepathy and other oddities. People obviously also appreciate that Sheldrake is paying heed to the intrinsic value of animals. He tells of having reacted strongly to the ‘objectifying’ attitude prevalent in parts of his own profession, and which is poignantly expressed in René Descartes’ obnoxious statement that when an animal screams (in pain) it is equal to the squeaking from an ungreased wagon wheel. According to Descartes animals don’t think and therefore they are not able to have a conscious experience of pain. Cartesian ideas, which have been—and to some extent still are—widespread in academic circles, may obviously pave the way for unnecessary brutal experiments on live animals.</p>
<p class="indent">Sheldrake paints a completely different picture and defends animals as sentient beings, and in the book <i>Dogs That Know When Their Owners Are Coming Home</i> he also defends them as telepathic beings! Few are those in the academic community who will publicly admit to a belief in telepathy—be it in relation to humans or to animals. But as Sheldrake has experienced several times: after two or three glasses of good wine tales of telepathy are told even among biologists! Sheldrake has built up a large database of reported cases, amounting to thousands, which appear to support the case for telepathic exchange between humans and animals. He doesn’t claim it is possible to discuss the presidency of Donald Trump, Brexit, the situation in the Middle East or the environmental policy of the Green Party, but Sheldrake is convinced of the possibility of telepathic exchanges of essentials as say, care and fear, and also of other things that are important to the four-legged: food, going for a walk, homecomings, etc. What I find especially moving are the stories where animals, apparently based on telepathy, have intervened to stop their owners from committing suicide.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h201"/>Jay-T—the Telepathic Terrier</p>
<p class="noindent">Sheldrake has not been content just to collect other people’s stories but has also conducted his own experiments. The most noteworthy was with Jaytee, a ‘telepathic terrier’ living close to Manchester, England who mysteriously seemed to know when Pam Smart, his owner, was heading for home. Pam and her parents had noticed that Jaytee strikingly often would be in the front porch when Pam got home—as if the dog knew she was on her way and was waiting for her. But—maybe Pam arrived home at quite regular times and the dog somehow was able to adjust to this? Or perhaps Jaytee, in fact, would stand quite close to the porch much of the time when Pam was away? Or maybe he was able to hear familiar engine sounds from afar and based on this recognition stood at the porch just as Pam’s vehicle was approaching?</p>
<p class="indent">Sheldrake wanted to find out and started digging into the matter. He writes:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Preliminary observations revealed that Jaytee usually started waiting for Pam just before she set off homewards, apparently when she formed the intention to do so. He did this whatever the time of day on 85 out of 100 return journeys</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Sheldrake installed cameras in the houses where Jaytee stayed (trials were run both from Pam’s place and from that of her sister) to document the dog’s behavior: ‘In formal, randomized tests, Pam went at least five miles away from home. While she was out, the place where Jaytee waited was filmed continuously on time-coded videotape.’ Sheldrake tested out Jaytee’s alleged skills again and again, and had Pam arrive at varying times so there were no routines to indicate when she would be approaching. He also had her use different vehicles to avoid the sounds of familiar engines that could give her away. And, according to Sheldrake, the film footage showed that Jaytee was near the porch around 4 percent of the time in general, while when Pam was on her way home Jaytee was by the porch about 55 percent of the time—a massive difference!</p>
<p class="indent">If Sheldrake has interpreted the dog’s movements correctly such a difference in percentage would be a stark indicator that Jaytee actually had true perceptions—true extrasensory perceptions—of when Pam would be coming home. Admittedly, Pam’s parents and sister were in the house together with Jaytee in some of the trials. But as they didn’t know the time schedule they were not able to divulge Pam’s homecoming to the dog via subtle signals such as excitement, restlessness, etc. Unless, of course, <i>they themselves</i> telepathically perceived Pam’s arrival!</p>
<p class="indent">However, the well-known skeptic Richard Wiseman has also conducted some experiments with the selfsame Jaytee, even borrowing and using Sheldrake’s equipment. And Wiseman’s results did—I almost said ‘of course’—<i>not</i> come in similar to Sheldrake’s. Hence Wiseman has cast aspersions on Sheldrake’s conclusions and suggested that he may have interpreted the dog’s behavior selectively—in favor of his hypothesis, that is (how close to the porch counts as ‘close,’ etc.). Sheldrake on his part has claimed that Wiseman’s factual basis is too weak (as far as I have ascertained Wiseman ran just four filmed trials with Jaytee whereas Sheldrake ran a hundred). And in addition, Sheldrake claims that Wiseman, both in writing and on TV, has presented ‘alternative facts,’ in the Conwayan sense (willful misrepresentations of the truth). In some of Wiseman’s trials Jaytee, so it would seem, did not do all that bad. But, according to Sheldrake, Wiseman has not been willing to admit this.</p>
<p class="indent">Sheldrake, who exudes tweedy old-style etiquette and high-table bonhomie, has said that he perceives Wiseman’s behavior to be ‘completely outrageous.’ The lack of consensus between these two profiled researchers is glaring and the trust is tenuous, to put it mildly. As of today I don’t know if they speak <i>with</i> or only <i>about</i> each other. On Sheldrake’s website one can find a presentation of the controversy with links to the essential facts—also the alternative ones!</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h202"/>Telephone Telepathy</p>
<p class="noindent">Another area where Sheldrake has been involved is ‘telephone telepathy.’ The experience of thinking about a friend whom you have not heard from in a long time and then, shortly after, to have a call from this same friend is, as we know, quite widespread. But perhaps such occurrences could be purely coincidental? Perhaps one has been thinking of many friends during the day but in hindsight one tends to remember only the one that (accidentally) called that afternoon? Or could it, in fact, rather be due to telepathy? This will obviously be difficult to determine under ordinary circumstances. Sheldrake was curious to figure this out, and designed a simple experiment going roughly as follows.</p>
<p class="indent">The conductor of the experiment has a volunteer subject make an agreement with four of his/her friends or relatives (emotional connections must be a factor). These four people are located in separate houses with access to telephones but without individual answering tones! At random times the conductor contacts one of the four friends and tells him/her to call the subject. The subject will now—before answering the call—try to guess who is calling. A research assistant who is with the subject writes down the guess, and the subject is then asked to pick up the phone to check who is actually calling. As there are four friends who may call we should—based on a normal distribution of results—expect that the subject will guess correctly one out of four times, meaning 25 percent of the cases. But what turns out, according to Sheldrake, is that the subject on average will guess correctly much more often, typically in about 40 percent of the cases!</p>
<p class="indent">Sheldrake has eventually had over a thousand persons participate in this experiment, which in addition has been replicated at the universities of Amsterdam and Freiburg with quite similar results. The experiment was carried out with variations giving slightly different scores, yet the results differed significantly from mere chance.</p>
<p class="indent">If Sheldrake’s depiction really is true and faithful we’ll have to consider factors other than mere coincidence. If we for the sake of argument disregard possible flawed reporting—either consciously (cheating) or unconsciously—telepathy could be a relevant explanation. Viewed from an evolutionary perspective it seems obvious that in antediluvian times—meaning before God created the mobile phone!—having such contact with kinsmen could favor survival.</p>
<p class="indent">The aforementioned experiment with telephone telepathy is quite easy to organize, something that is important to Sheldrake who wants lay people to actively engage in science—to become ‘citizen scientists.’ He has even developed an app to facilitate experiments of this kind. I haven’t conducted the experiment myself (yet) but it could obviously be fun to try it out with friends and—for those who are teachers—with pupils/students.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h203"/>Other Ideas</p>
<p class="noindent">Sheldrake has also experimented with other things, including the so-called ‘stare effect’—that people (might) have an ability to know when they are being stared at. And as usual he has designed experiments for people to test things out themselves. One of Sheldrake’s later books is called <i>The Science Delusion</i> in the UK, in the US, <i>Science Set Free</i>. His main concern here is that much of science, as he sees it, operates with a series of tacit dogmas—e.g. that (an outdated variant of) materialism is seen as the ‘obligatory’ philosophy—which is obstructive to new insights. Sure enough, most natural scientists have ignored the book, but it has fared quite well with some philosophers and also in the media. It could be refreshing and expand your horizons to spend some time in the company of this persistent heretic, even if you don’t swallow his every word hook, line and sinker. And Sheldrake should, in fact, be completely happy with that. In a debate with the well-known skeptical psychologist David Marks he stated:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Like Marks, I am a sceptic but of a different kind. His scepticism is directed towards anything he regards as ‘paranormal,’ taking as normal that which lies within the limits of current scientific understanding. My scepticism is directed towards the assumption that we know enough to proclaim what is possible and what is not</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="h3"><a id="h204"/>Continue Blogging With a New Computer When the Old One Breaks?</p>
<p class="bq"><i>It is not more surprising to be born twice than once; everything in nature is resurrection</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Voltaire</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h205"/>Historical Perspectives and Early Research on Reincarnation</p>
<p class="noindent">As many readers will probably know the idea of some form of reincarnation—‘transmigration of souls’—is prevalent in various parts of the world; both in Hindu and Buddhist traditions, and also with several peoples native to Africa, America and Australia. It is less well known that such ideas were by no means introduced to the West by the 1960s counterculture, but that they, in fact, have a long tradition in European history. Just to give an indication: notions of reincarnation are found in the teachings of Greek philosophers such as Pythagoras, Plato (in some works) and Plotinus; in some of the early Christian churches; in Jewish esotericism (Kabbalah); in Sufism, the Islamic mysticism; with Gallic druids (Getafix in Asterix); in the occult philosophy of the Italian Renaissance; in the teachings of the Freemasons; with some of the French Enlightenment philosophers, the German Romantics and the American Transcendentalists.</p>
<p class="indent">The official religious European expectation regarding life after death as we know has been that Heaven or, alternatively, a less pleasant place (or even total annihilation) is the next station. Whereas diverse materialist secularist philosophies espouse the idea that the end of the body is the end of everything. If the computer is broken then it is ‘Game over—no replay.’ There will be no more gaming or blogging after the processor has said good night! But, as mentioned above, the notion of reincarnation flows as an ever-present undercurrent in the Western history of ideas and diverse New Age movements have ensured that this idea has become common property. Surveys indicate that we are not far from the truth if we estimate that approximately 20–25 percent of Westerners believe in reincarnation in one form or another. And they do so unashamedly and with broad smiles, right in the face of both skeptics and priests, who for their part are pulling their hair out over such naivety and/or heresy.</p>
<p class="indent">Reincarnation has thus become established as an important modern symbol—perhaps <i>the most</i> important modern symbol—of <i>transcendence</i>; that our being exceeds the seemingly unfair and sad limitations of having only one life at our disposal. And perhaps reincarnation to some degree might provide a plausible answer to the world’s injustices? For some (but by no means all) variants of this idea include the belief that one’s life is part of a larger accounting governed by an ethical natural law—the law of <i>karma</i>, as it is often referred to in the East. Personally, I first heard about reincarnation when reading that the double murderer Gary Gilmore, executed in 1977, had said that reincarnation is the only way there could be some justice in the world.</p>
<p class="indent">But—longing for transcendence or justice does not mean that it will be provided; being hungry does not mean that there is food in the fridge. So—could there be other reasons to believe in reincarnation beyond the comfort this might give with respect to our desire to continue living and our yearning for justice? Or—in some cases—our desire to be Alexander the Great, heading victorious Macedonian armies on spectacular campaigns in the Near East? Or to be Cleopatra sailing lazily down the Nile, surrounded by servants waving their fans of palms, all the while the eye of Ra the sun god is glowing dazzlingly in the sky above the Pyramids of Giza?</p>
<p class="indent">The literature on reincarnation is enormous, as are the variations in quality. Beyond stories passed on by traditions and gurus some anthropologists, psychiatrists and psychologists have related astonishing and apparently well-documented stories that seemingly are indicative of people having lived past lives. A famous case is published in the book <i>The Cathars and Reincarnation: The Record of a Past Life in Thirteenth-Century France</i> (1970) by the—up to that point—well-respected English psychiatrist Arthur Guirdham. He describes the case of ‘Mrs Smith,’ a woman who presumably was fully sane, but who for years had suffered from powerful nightmares involving burnings, murders and massacres. In addition, her dreams would provide accompanying historical depictions, including information about medieval costumes, rituals, strange vernaculars and songs.</p>
<p class="indent">Guirdham, who was unable to find a plausible psychiatric explanation for all this weirdness, but who was interested in spiritual perspectives on life, eventually consulted a historian, a certain Professor Nellie at the University of Toulouse. Nellie informed Guirdham that Mrs Smith’s accounts were astoundingly descriptive of the life and times of the Cathars. The Cathars—‘the pure ones’—were members of a medieval Gnostic-Christian sect in France who in the 13th century were massacred several times by armies of crusaders initiated by Pope Innocent III (!) and the Inquisition. Some of the information imparted by Mrs Smith was apparently not publicly known at the time. This, if true, is of course highly interesting with respect to our theory of a Mental Internet… The life of the Cathars has been admirably described in the book <i>Montaillou</i> (1975) by the French historian Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie.</p>
<p class="indent">Guirdham was a prolific and versatile writer who published novels as well as books on spirituality and psychology; he has also contributed to a textbook on psychiatry. Over the years he may possibly have taken the Cathar thing a bit too far—but then, who am I to say?—as he eventually came to believe that not only Mrs Smith but a large group of Cathars had reincarnated in the region around Bath, England where he lived.</p>
<p class="indent">The quite famous stories collected by the Jewish rabbi Yonassan Gershom, can be found in <i>Beyond the Ashes: Cases of Reincarnation from the Holocaust</i> (1992), and <i>From Ashes to Healing: Mystical Encounters with the Holocaust</i> (1996). During the 1990s Gershom experienced, to his surprise, various people presenting him with powerful stories of what appeared to be their former lives in Europe during the Holocaust. Like Mrs Smith some of Gershom’s subjects would reveal specifics—say, about the appearance of objects in a concentration camp—that they, so it seemed, could hardly have learned of in a regular way. Interestingly enough, some of these reincarnation/‘reincarnation’ stories were disclosed to Gershom by people with no known Jewish ancestry.</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h206"/>Ian Stevenson: Reincarnation, Again, and Again and Again…</p>
<p class="noindent">The one who above all others is associated with research on ‘the transmigration of souls’ is the Canadian psychiatrist Professor Ian Stevenson (1918–2007). He devoted over 40 years of work probing the mysteries of reincarnation! Interestingly enough, he was no sectarian but an utmost sober and ‘boring’ researcher. Stevenson published in peer-reviewed journals both before and after he chose to sail into the dangerous waters of reincarnation research, thus challenging the ‘emperor’s wrath’—risking the lack of academic respect, support and position, as we saw in <a href="08_chapter03.xhtml">chapters 3</a> and <a href="09_chapter04.xhtml">4</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the reasons that Stevenson went down this particular lane was that some patients exhibited neuroses that, as he saw it, couldn’t reasonably be ascribed either to trauma or to genetics. Working from his base at the University of Virginia, where he was director of the Division of Personality Studies, Stevenson collected and examined about 3,000 (three thousand!) cases where children seemingly had remembered past lives. These kids described and named specific things such as past-life domiciles, past-life spouses, past-life children, past-life occupations, etc. It was possible to check many stories against public records, registers, etc., and several of them proved, according to Stevenson, astoundingly correct.</p>
<p class="indent">It is important to be aware of two things: Many of the people Stevenson examined were children between the ages of three and seven. And substantial parts of his research took place before the creation of the internet (the <i>physical</i> internet, mind you!). Although the parents could have given the children this or that piece of information there seemed to be little chance that regular channels (TV, movies, books, etc.) could have provided such detailed information as the children were sometimes able to deliver. For example, the case of Suzanne Ghanem.</p>
<p class="indent">She was a Lebanese girl from Beirut who, when just 16 months old, time and again had picked up the phone trying to contact a certain Leila. Around the age of two Suzanne had started claiming she used to live in another and bigger house, and that she was Hanan Mansour, a recently deceased woman. A person who happened to be acquainted both with the Ghanem family and the Mansour family recognized the names Suzanne had mentioned, and arranged for the two families—who did not know of each other—to meet. What turned out was, among other things, that the recently deceased Hanan Mansour had tried to call her daughter Leila from the hospital where she had died. There are of course lots of Leilas and Hanans in Lebanon, both dead and alive. But, at first glance Suzanne was, so it seemed, able to identify multiple persons depicted in the Mansour family’s photos; she could name no fewer than 13 of its members! Furthermore, Suzanne would relate events only known to the close family. For example, she seemingly recounted parts of a speech that had been made at the funeral of Hanan’s brother! And there were lots of other oddities as well.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h207"/>Reception of Stevenson’s Work</p>
<p class="noindent">Stevenson’s first book, <i>Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation</i>, was released in 1966, and it has become a bestseller as well as a point of reference within the field. Stevenson went on to publish 13 more books with the same theme, the last being <i>European Cases of the Reincarnation Type</i> (2003). In addition Stevenson wrote around 300 related articles. For sure, the academic communities had for the most part no problems in curbing their enthusiasm, but in 1975 one of Stevenson’s books actually got an appreciative review in the <i>Journal of the American Medical Association</i>. The journal’s book review editor, Dr Lester Snow King, a pathologist and prolific author on medical history, wrote that</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>in regard to reincarnation he [Stevenson] has painstakingly and unemotionally collected a detailed series of cases from India, cases in which the evidence is difficult to explain on any other grounds. He presents his corpus of evidence in an interesting way, providing careful detail, and discussing the procedures that he used in attempting to verify the assertions. He provides a critical analysis of the strong and the weak points</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">In 1977, the peer-reviewed <i>Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease</i> devoted nearly their entire September issue to presenting Stevenson’s work. The editor, psychiatrist Eugene Brody, justified publishing this type of research—which normally would have been regarded as unscientific—with reference to the ‘scientific and personal credibility of the authors, the legitimacy of their research methods, and the conformity of their reasoning to the usual canons of rational thought.’</p>
<p class="indent">One of the contributors was the well-known psychiatrist, psychoanalyst, sex therapist and educator Dr Harold Lief. He was both a colleague and friend of Stevenson’s but of a more skeptical disposition. Lief says: ‘In writing this commentary, I find myself in an awkward position. I am far from being a convert to a belief in parapsychological phenomena during this incarnation, let alone a believer in the survival of the soul or spirit […].’</p>
<p class="indent">Still, he had the greatest respect for Stevenson’s work and confesses: ‘I am a “true believer” in his methods of investigation.’ Some years earlier Lief had conducted ‘normal’ psychological fieldwork with Stevenson, and about this cooperative effort he recalls, ‘I was able to observe, firsthand, his thoroughness in assembling the data on which we based our report, and to recognize the clarity of his thinking as we explored the various hypotheses we were testing in a real life situation.’ Lief also made an often-cited remark about Stevenson: ‘Either he is making a colossal mistake, or he will be known […] as “the Galileo of the twentieth century.”’</p>
<p class="indent">One person who wanted to find out which of these two options was most likely—Dr S. making a colossal mistake, or being a new Galileo—was Tom Shroder, a prize-winning journalist who, among other things, has worked as an editor at the <i>Washington Post</i>. In 2010 Shroder was awarded the coveted Pulitzer Prize. In the late 1990s Stevenson, after having been ‘courted’ for a long time, allowed Shroder to accompany him on his travels and to check on how he collected all his stunning data. Schroder soon found that Stevenson was very thorough; he would often make multiple return visits to his subjects and sometimes question more than 20 witnesses for just a single case. Shroder began the journey as an interested skeptic but after some months he had become convinced that Stevenson’s work was to be trusted—that he was not a victim either of lying children or attention-seeking parents, and that his interviews were neutral and did not implant ‘false memories,’ etc. Shroder, the award-winning journalist, would certainly know a thing or two about interviewing…</p>
<p class="indent">In 1999 Shroder published the book <i>Old Souls: The Scientific Search for Proof of Past Lives</i>, in which he relates his experiences and reflections from the journey. Many interesting cases are presented; Shroder has dedicated a full chapter to the story of Suzanne Ghanem, which I briefly mentioned above. <i>Old Souls</i> was well received and got favorable reviews, e.g. in the journal of New York University School of Medicine, Professor Jack Coulehan wrote:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>As a participant observer, Shroder tells a sympathetic, yet questioning, story of Stevenson’s investigation (or follow up) of a few recent cases. In the process, he presents a compelling portrait of the maverick 80-year-old psychiatrist. […] The data is very impressive. Stevenson’s work has nothing to do with (and long antedates) the deluge of remembered lives that constitutes one of the least endearing aspects of New Age culture</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Shroder admits that for his own part the accumulation of cases, across cultures and circumstances—all with diverse, independent witnesses who in a down-to-earth way confirmed ‘unimaginable’ things—eventually wore away his ‘skeptical prejudices.’ Perhaps it is a bit sacrilegious to say but if one is interested in Stevenson’s work it will probably be more rewarding to read, at least to start with, Shroder’s fluently written text rather than Stevenson’s own, more academic, writings.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h208"/>Reincarnation and Birthmarks</p>
<p class="noindent">Okay—maybe some of these kids actually presented information not available to them in a normal way. But does this mean that reincarnation has to be the answer? Based on our model all the necessary information about these other lives could have been telepathically downloaded from the Mental Cloud. This would be parallel to a person visiting YouTube and watching a documentary about Elvis Presley. Afterwards the person would be able to present us with a lot of details about Elvis’ life. But knowledge of these facts would certainly not turn this person into a reincarnation of Elvis!</p>
<p class="indent">Stevenson was familiar with this train of thought, and he, in fact, thought it to be a <i>likely</i> explanation. But what made him think that reincarnation was <i>the most likely</i> explanation was that quite a few of the children had very unusual birthmarks and deformities that matched well with the violent deaths the children told of having experienced in their former lives. There was a Mexican boy who was born with a scar-like mark in the midriff area and who told a story of having been killed about 30 years earlier by a gunshot to the diaphragm. And there was a Thai child who was born with a marked and rare skin lesion at the back of the head and who claimed to remember having been killed with a blow on the head from a heavy knife. And there was a Turkish boy who was born with a starkly deformed ear claiming to have been shot in the head at pointblank from the side. And…and…and…</p>
<p class="indent">But maybe the children (fanciful creatures as they are) or their parents (honor-defending creatures as they may be) had constructed these stories to embellish the—unwanted and perhaps even shameful—marks? This seems very reasonable. However, in a dozen cases Stevenson, in addition to the stories and birthmarks, also found specific evidence—autopsy reports and forensic photographs—that supported the children’s stories. The typical case would be something like this: A child between three- and six-years-old would tell about being another person with such-and-such a name who had lived in such-and-such a town and had died in such-and-such a way. When Stevenson then visited the hospital in the town concerned he would on a number of occasions find that they had in fact a person, a corpse, ‘on file’ matching the child’s descriptions of both the biography and cause of death.</p>
<p class="indent">Stevenson has submitted much of the documentation concerning these somewhat eerie cases in a work of over 2,000 (!) pages called <i>Reincarnation and Biology: A Contribution to the Etiology of Birthmarks and Birth Defects</i>. Parts of the material can be found in an abridged version called <i>Where Reincarnation and Biology Intersect</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">I must admit that the forensic photos have made a lasting impression on me; with my own eyes I could see the dead bodies with serious injuries fitting surprisingly well with the children’s stories about the death of the people they had allegedly been. How on earth could this be possible? Could it be a plot with cleverly fabricated stories, reports and photographs? Had perhaps publicity-obsessed parents—or even Stevenson himself—manipulated or bribed staff members at diverse hospitals into faking the records? Or could it instead be possible that…?</p>
<p class="indent">According to Stevenson’s intellectual heir, the psychiatrist Dr Jim Tucker, birthmarks or deformations resembling the injuries of the person whose life the child recalls are present in roughly 20 percent of the reincarnation cases. These are, as could be expected, often cases where the deceased person has suffered a markedly violent death— murder, car crash, etc.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h209"/>Objections</p>
<p class="noindent">Most of Stevenson’s colleagues, even those who had no faith in his project, regarded him to be utterly serious and honest. But some believed, of course, that he was probably a tad too eager to believe in the stories he was told. What critics often hold against Stevenson is that he hasn’t provided a proper explanation for <i>how</i> reincarnation may be possible; are we to believe that our minds can be popped in and out of bodies like batteries in a flashlight? That our consciousness is a kind of spiritual ‘lump’ which can jump into another body, sporting its memories and defects? Or how should we imagine this? Providing an exhaustive explanation for a mystery of this magnitude would probably have been awarded multiple Nobel Prizes, and is probably much too much to demand from a pioneer researcher. As mentioned earlier: Peculiar observations and phenomena will often precede—sometimes by centuries or even by millennia—the theories that explain them (e.g. comets, solar eclipses, bird migrations, hereditary traits, etc.).</p>
<p class="indent">Another objection to Stevenson’s research is that to a large extent it relies on field interviews and not on ‘hard’ facts. This, of course, makes the information more susceptible to error than is the case with information collected in a lab. But, as we saw in <a href="12_chapter07.xhtml">chapter 7</a>, such an objection is equally valid (or invalid) for other research as well; anthropologists, ethnographers and folklorists, for instance, will often rely heavily on field interviews. And as we heard, the award-winning journalist Tom Shroder espoused Stevenson’s approach and thought his data difficult to explain within the ‘sanctioned’ Western horizon of understanding (i.e. explaining the children’s stories as fantasy and/or fraud). Stevenson himself defended his scientific approach as follows:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Modern psychologists imitated physicists by only being interested in what happened in a lab, not in things like love and death, and parapsychologists imitated psychologists. That is, you have tight control of conditions. But it seems to me that it’s far better to be 90 percent certain of something important than 100 percent certain of something that is trivial</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">And ‘trivial’ is certainly not what comes to mind when taking a look at Stevenson’s research! The high-profiled atheist and skeptic Sam Harris, author of <i>The End of Faith</i>, is one of those who has been intrigued, and on one occasion he stated that ‘either he [Stevenson] is a victim of truly elaborate fraud, or something interesting is going on.’ Harris has later mitigated his statement somewhat, but still…</p>
<p class="indent">Stevenson reputedly never said that he ‘believed’ in reincarnation; rather he said that if a person has a wish to believe in reincarnation there would, from a scientific point of view, be nothing against it. There are obviously many who will disagree with him but Stevenson was, however, fine with that, and said that his own opinions were not what mattered but that one was willing to evaluate the evidence. He also stated: ‘There are, as I tried to show, various alternative explanations of the data, some of which are also “likely.” I do believe, however, that survival is the “most likely” interpretation.’</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h210"/>Taking Over the Baton</p>
<p class="noindent">One person who became fascinated by Stevenson’s research and who today manages his archives is Dr Jim Tucker, psychiatrist and director of the Child and Family Psychiatry Outpatient Clinic at the University of Virginia. Tucker has written extensively on reincarnation stories; films have been made based on his work, and he has also become a household name with the media and with the stars; he has appeared on <i>Larry King Live</i>, and in 2019 he was interviewed by John Cleese of Monty Python. Tucker has focused his work on American children. I would guess this is mainly for practical reasons, but likely it is also because a frequent criticism of research of this kind is that much of it has been conducted in countries where a belief in reincarnation is widespread, for example India. One could therefore suspect that the children’s stories merely reflected the culture’s common belief. Tucker’s research effectively counters this assessment, as it makes clear that such stories are also plentiful in the US (and other Western countries). Tucker presents some newer cases in the book <i>Return to Life: Extraordinary Cases of Children Who Remember Past Lives</i>.</p>
<p class="indent">Stevenson was, of course, aware of this objection—that the children’s stories might just reflect common belief. But as he had also found such stories in cultures neutral or even negative to reincarnation he thought that ‘common belief’ didn’t quite cut it as an explanation. Just as a culture open to reincarnation may sometimes elicit false stories (thus causing ‘over-reporting’), it is equally true that an environment negative to reincarnation—as e.g. most materialist and Christian milieux—will often suppress such tales (thus causing ‘under-reporting’). Stevenson thought this could be the reason that relatively fewer cases are reported from Western countries.</p>
<p class="indent">The iconic astrophysicist and skeptic Carl Sagan has stated in his book <i>The Demon-Haunted World</i> that one of parapsychology’s claims that merits study is the assertion that ‘young children sometimes report the details of a previous life, which upon checking turn out to be accurate and which they could not have known about in any other way than reincarnation.’ Since the one and only Carl Sagan, a man who hardly could be called naive, thought this particular subject worthy of study, perhaps we ought not put it to rest so easily. And who knows: Maybe we will be able to continue the blog with a new computer when the old one eventually breaks?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h211"/>The Grand Narrative: Worlds are Fading, the Field is Upgrading—a Basis for Cosmic Optimism?</p>
<p class="bq"><i>Don’t urge me, friend, to solve these dark equations; I’d rather ask; my job’s not explanations</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Henrik Ibsen, from ‘A Rhyme-Letter’ (1875)</p>
<p class="bq"><i>The full meaning of life, the collective meaning of all human desires, is fundamentally a mystery beyond our grasp. As a young man, I chafed at this state of affairs. But by now I have made peace with it. I even feel a certain honor to be associated with such a mystery</i>.</p>
<p class="bq1">~ Eugene Wigner</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h212"/>The Myths We Live By</p>
<p class="noindent">The atheist philosopher Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) was a tireless advocate for truth, human dignity and world peace. In this commitment, he seems to have found a deep fulfillment, albeit his views on the big picture rather sound like the pinnacle of pessimism. In the small masterpiece <i>A Free Man’s Worship</i> he says we have to face that:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>all the labors of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in the vast death of the solar system, and that the whole temple of Man’s achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the debris of a universe in ruins—all these things, if not quite beyond dispute, are yet so nearly certain, that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to stand</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">In devotion to Truth, Goodness and Beauty—‘the Platonic trinity’—many experience a deep meaning even within the, let’s say, gloomy scenario that Russell sketches. Others feel, however, that without a God (theism), and/or spiritual beings such as spirits and angels (spiritualism) and the associated parallel dimensions, it is difficult to find a ‘grand narrative,’ a larger, encompassing story that may provide us with a credible meaning in life. While still others feel that such entities and dimensions, regardless of whether they exist or not, are in any case secondary to the Cosmos itself—divine, eternal and elevated, ever-becoming conscious of itself through its creations and creatures, continuously unfolding its own inherent meaning (pantheism).</p>
<p class="indent">Seemingly, most people have, consciously or unconsciously, adapted a myth, a ‘grand narrative’—some story that circumscribes their life and gives meaning to their existence. Such stories may neither be verified nor verifiable, but they still provide the frame for Life as a whole. For example, the different religions and philosophical <i>credos</i>—as the belief in Mankind, the belief in Progress and the belief in Reason—as well as the various nationalisms, can all be seen as examples of such ‘grand narratives,’ stories to live by.</p>
<p class="h4"><a id="h213"/>Thinking Big with Ervin Laszlo</p>
<p class="noindent">The highly versatile Hungarian systems and environmental philosopher Ervin Laszlo (b. 1932), whose model of consciousness we discussed briefly in <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a>, has launched what we could call a ‘meta narrative,’ a great-grand story, that seemingly has ample space for the ‘grand narratives’ of both atheists, theists, spiritualists, pantheists and agnostics. We are often recommended to ‘think big,’ and Laszlo’s story is nothing if not big: you almost inevitably become giddy as he does not confine his storyline to just one universe. Rather, Laszlo draws an infinitely large circle around the whole Cosmos and postulates a <i>Metaverse</i>—an unending chain of universes, one after another, separated by occasional ‘Big Bangs’ in between.</p>
<p class="indent">Laszlo has described his vision as ‘imaginative but not imaginary.’ Here we are dealing with a cosmological story, not empirical research. Thus it should not be evaluated by the same criteria for verification and falsification as, say, Ian Stevenson’s research on reincarnation discussed earlier in the chapter. It is not necessary that such stories are <i>provable</i>; it is sufficient if they are <i>probable</i>. This apparent limitation needs not be at all disqualifying. In his 1931 book Cosmic Religion and Other Opinions and Aphorisms, Einstein says: ‘Imagination is more important than knowledge. For knowledge is limited, whereas imagination embraces the entire world, stimulating progress, giving birth to evolution.’</p>
<p class="indent">The reader may perhaps remember from <a href="11_chapter06.xhtml">chapter 6</a> that an important concept for Laszlo is <i>akasha</i>; which refers to <i>ether</i> in Sanskrit. It may further denote space, sky and essence, whereas the original meaning is ‘radiation’ or ‘brilliance’—indeed a rich and complex concept! And, as mentioned, Laszlo’s onus is on akasha as an eternal hotline between all and everything, an all-encompassing field of information and memory. Hence in our terminology akasha is some sort of cosmic Mental Internet. In his book <i>Science and the Akashic Field: An Integral Theory of Everything</i> Laszlo elaborates on some of his thoughts about, well, about everything, including akasha:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>The informed universe is a universe where the A-field [the akashic field] is a real and significant element. Thanks to this field, this universe is of mind-boggling coherence. All that happens in one place happens also in other places; all that happened at one time happens also at all times after that. Nothing is ‘local’, limited to where and when it is happening. All things are global, indeed cosmic, for the memory of all things extends to all places and all times</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">But what does this have to do with our own, apparently small, lives? Or with psi? Well, if all our experiences—everything that we have felt and thought, the values we have fought for, our love, our hopes and our dreams, our discoveries, our art and our science, the increased consciousness we have contributed to—if all this information and also much more (the experiences of animals, all nature’s genetic codes, the crystalline structures, etc.) is ‘uploaded’ and integrated in the world’s own inherent memory, that could be really good news. Because when an old universe dies and a new one arises, this new universe will—because the akasha endures—have available all the lessons learned from previous universes. Nothing is lost, all files are transferred; the contributions we have made to progress, a better world and increased consciousness, no matter how small they may be, will be there for the benefit of all future universes!</p>
<p class="indent">And as for the role of psi? In <i>Science and the Akashic Field</i> Laszlo also discusses and endorses various types of paranormal phenomena. For example he describes many, apparently highly successful, experiments with telepathy or—under another name—‘transpersonal communication.’ Laszlo thinks transpersonal communication presents an opportunity to both scientifically detect and to personally experience ‘the interconnectedness of all things.’ And that the latter—the possibility to personally experience this interconnectedness—is not just available for a few elect, for specially gifted, for prophets or psychics, but for nearly everybody.</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="noindent"><i>Identical twins are only the top of the tree of bonded pairs. Some form of telepathy has been observed among all people who share a deep bond, such as mothers and children, lovers, long-term couples, close friends. In these cases all but the most conservative psychologists are forced to recognize the existence of some transpersonal contact. But only exceptionally broad-minded psychologists admit that transpersonal contact includes the ability to transmit thoughts and images, and that it is given to many and perhaps all people. […] It appears that almost all people possess ‘paranormal’ abilities</i>.</p>
</div>
<p class="noindent">Hence such phenomena may function as a guarantee for the eternal and intimate liaison between fellow human beings and between Humankind and the Mystery. Laszlo has even suggested that, given that there are conscious beings in other places in the universe—which its size definitely allows for and perhaps even makes an odds-on possibility—the akashic field would likely make it possible for us to telepathically contact and exchange information with them!</p>
<p class="indent">Laszlo is clearly a thinker off the Western beaten track, but he cannot be dismissed as a lightweight. A short CV: He has been employed at Princeton and Yale, and is a honorary doctor at several universities; he has been a member of the prestigious Club of Rome, and has himself started the Club of Budapest, another think tank boasting a number of political and cultural celebrities. Laszlo has conducted studies for the UN, and published more than 70 books and hundreds of articles. In his youth, he was a classical pianist, touring the world and making a number of recordings. Furthermore, Laszlo has engaged in peace work with the Indian guru-philosopher Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. Like several of the thinkers we have met earlier in the book, Laszlo has also been digging deep into the treasure trove of Indian philosophy. Perhaps there is some truth to the words of the German-Swiss novelist and sage Hermann Hesse when he paradoxically says, ‘the oldest texts are always the most contemporary.’</p>
<p class="indent">So—maybe Laszlo’s perspectives could enhance the ambiance, standing as a rebuke to pessimism, giving us a brighter outlook on the big picture. Both his highlighting of the interconnectedness of all things manifested via psi, and his exciting thought that even our smallest contributions to increased consciousness and human evolution will never be lost and therefore will never be in vain—both these closely related perspectives might perhaps impart a zest to our sometimes joyful, sometimes painful, and sometimes drab grey existence. In short: perhaps Laszlo’s notion of <i>akasha</i> could form the basis for a cosmic optimism?</p>
<p class="h3"><a id="h214"/>Farewell and Blessings</p>
<p class="noindent">I want to thank the readers so much for being willing to sign up with the suggested thought experiment: that our ‘consciousnesses’ can be seen as some sort of Mental Internet. And also for being my travel companions on this journey in the borderland of consciousness! Perhaps our simple model has enabled us to shed some light on phenomena that otherwise would seem incomprehensible? And, if nothing else, hopefully our playing around with this thought has brought attention to the fact that no one—neither lay nor learned—knows what consciousness is. And moreover, that the prevailing notion of consciousness—that it is just ‘brain urine,’ the product of chemical processes in our heads—is not satisfactory, insofar as many phenomena seem difficult, even impossible, to explain within this horizon. So maybe it is due time to seriously consider different models? In the course of the chapters we have looked at some options that could represent steps toward a model with greater explanatory power.</p>
<p class="indent">As mentioned above, Einstein considered imagination to be more important than knowledge. He once elaborated on this to his good friend, the Danish mathematician and humorist Piet Hein, and said: ‘Knowledge often assumes too narrow a form, and imagination is often right in thinking that there is something more, and that everything could be completely different.’ It is stimulating for the imagination to meet with people who do not march in step and who dare to think thoughts other than just the correct ones (yawn!) sanctioned by consensus and various edicts. When people like the double Nobel laureate Marie Curie out of serious interest repeatedly participated in spiritualist séances, and the physics genius Wolfgang Pauli found it rewarding to exchange ideas with the ‘occult mud-wrestler’ C.G. Jung for over 20 years, I believe <i>we</i> should neither fear being ‘tainted by association’—mingling with the scientific <i>Einzelgänger</i>, the lone wolves, that we have become acquainted with: archaeologists, secret agents, anthropologists, occultists, philosophers, physicists, consciousness researchers, neuroscientists, psychiatrists and psychologists.</p>
<p class="indent">This colorful assembly comprises, as has been made clear, highly skilled professionals. Perhaps encountering these mavericks, their research and their stories, might cause us to revise a couple of our cherished but outworn opinions? This, in fact, could be a most healthy thing to do: using the trope of clothing the Norwegian novelist Alexander Kielland once, with an air of noble virtue, remarked: ‘It is rather unhygienic not to change opinion once in a while.’</p>
<p class="indent">Our journey into the borderland of consciousness has also brought us face to face with numerous sobriety-twisting episodes; some will perhaps take these to be miracles whereas others will certainly see them as chimeras or bluff. We, however, have suggested that they might be expressions of secret powers, unconsciously and discreetly used every day, without thought and without drama, but which sometimes—especially in emergency situations—may manifest in astonishing ways. And now, toward the close of the book, we have also seen examples that such phenomena might be more than just curiosities, and that they could conceivably serve us in many ways—in making decisions, in our relations to animals and relatives (sometimes they are not identical…), in our quest for personal growth, and in relating to <i>the</i> big questions.</p>
<p class="indent">Although these phenomena at first glance may seem puzzling, when looking closer they are probably not any stranger than anything else in this, our mystical, mystical world—such as the paranormal phenomenon that my body consists of the same chemical substances found in the flowerbed outside my window, yet having completely different properties, so that by a psychokinetic miracle I can conduct its physical movements with my non-physical will. Perhaps the psi phenomena, then, might be seen as a symbol of an essential feature of our world: that everything is intimately interrelated but in ways that we do not fully grasp?</p>
<p class="indent">And even stranger than how the world <i>works</i>, is the incomprehensible fact that it <i>is</i>. As once said by a girl in primary school (she later became my mother): ‘Why does <i>something</i> exist—why not <i>nothing, nothing, nothing</i>?’ There is hardly a more profound question, and often an old philosopher or a young child is needed to truly pose it. Nor is the answer obvious; to some degree we’ll probably have to content ourselves by being aware <i>that</i> the world is, but without forgetting to wonder. The great sociologist Max Weber believed that our time is characterized by an <i>Entzauberung der Welt</i>, a de-enchantment of the world. ‘Instrumental rationality’ has for many reduced the world to an object for exploitation—they think trees are valuable just for making paper, and animals just for making food. For people of this thinking, the world has become trivial.</p>
<p class="indent">And if Magic disappears then <i>Meaning</i> will also easily disappear. We are usually not able to give full value to ourselves and our fellow humans, to our four-legged, winged and otherwise equipped friends, to nature, yes, to the entire wide world, unless the grey veil of triviality is drawn aside. And perhaps the psi phenomena, regardless of how they are explained, can help us achieve this?</p>
<p class="indent">And perhaps we might surmise, as the transpersonal thinkers often suggest, that the psi phenomena can form part of an evolution toward an extended and expanded consciousness—a Consciousness that perhaps in one way or another, either individually or collectively, either in new lives or in new worlds—may transcend physical death? An exciting proposal, that is…</p>
<p class="indent">With these words, I thank you once more for being my fellow travelers! For me our journey has been a great pleasure, and I really hope you have enjoyed it too. So until next time: Goodbye, Jedi knights—and may the Force be with us all!</p>
</body>
</html>